
Presented to the 

LIBRARY of the 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO 

by 

PROFESSOR JOHN ROBSON 



Joe 




///</ 

.^srrm /J, . ft,//,/,, jt ',-r/rat/ 



THOMAS CARLYLE 



LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 



But as yet struggles the twelfth hour of the Night. 
Birds of darkness are on the wing ; spectres uproar ; 
the dead walk; the living dream. Thou, Eternal 
Providence, wilt make the Day dawn ! JEAN PAUL. 

Then said his Lordship, ' Well, God mend all ! ' 
' Nay, by God, Donald, we must help him to mend 
it!' said the other. RUSH-WORTH (Sir David 
Ramsay and Lord Rca, in 1630.) 



IN ONE VOLUME 



LONDON 

CHAPMAN AND HALL 

LIMITED 

1898 



Originally published 1850 




CONTENTS 

PAGE 

INTRODUCTION vii 

NO. 

I. THE PRESENT TIME ....... 1 

II. MODEL PRISONS ....... 48 

III. DOWNING STREET 87 

IV. THE NEW DOWNING STREET . . . , ,127 
V. STUMP-ORATOR ... . . 172 

VI. PARLIAMENTS ... . 214 

VII. HUDSON'S STATUE ....... 254 

VIII. JESUITISM . ..'.",,.' 293 

SUMMARY. ... . . 339 

INDEX , 351 



PORTRAIT OF THOMAS CARLYLE . . . frontispiece 

After MILLAIS. 



INTRODUCTION 

OF all Carlyle's works the Latter-Day Pamphlets are the most 
'occasional/ and for that reason, no doubt, they have suffered 
most from the hand of time. In truth they are journalism that 
and nothing else: glorified journalism if we like, but bearing 
such traces of their originating spirit as no drapery of imagina- 
tion or rhetoric or humour can altogether conceal. And what is 
more, the glorification of this journalism by the genius of the 
temporary journalist does not hide the fact that as journalism 
they are ineffective. They are too long, too discursive, too 
unpractical. They deal at once too much in generalities and 
too little ; and though largely denunciatory of those tendencies, 
moral and intellectual, which seemed to Carlyle to make for 
misgovernment in the England of 1850, they do not confine 
themselves wholly to that safe philosophic region, but condescend 
upon particulars to such an extent as to keep the reader in 
continual expectancy of some definite recommendations of legisla- 
tive or administrative policy which never come. For the 
counsels contained in 'The New Downing Street' with its 
fantastic proposals of reduction in the Foreign Office, the War 
Office, and the exterior departments of the State in general, 
and its visionary scheme of setting the Home Office to work in 
'regimenting Pauper Banditti into Soldiers of Industry,' could 
hardly even then, and certainly cannot now, be seriously con- 
sidered. 

And even the safer Carlylean generalities the tirades at large 
against Democracy, vigorous, eloquent, grimly comic as they often 



viii LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 

are, impress one less than usual. The note is forced ; the prophet 
is too wildly excited ; there is a suggestion of panic in his utter- 
ances ; and we could almost guess, without examining dates, that 
these warnings were uttered while the events of 1 848 were still 
fresh in the writer's mind. One sees that Carlyle's nerves had not 
yet recovered from the shock of that ' Year of Revolutions/ with 
its cyclonic wave of European revolt ; and small blame to him that 
he should have misread a phenomenon which remains imperfectly 
explained even at the present day. But misread it he clearly did. 
He evidently regarded it as the beginning of the end of Popular 
Rule, and inferred from it that Democracy which those among 
us who still believe it to be bound for the abyss must at least 
admit, eight-and-forty years afterwards, to be descending the 
slope in a very leisurely and decorous fashion had suddenly ' put 
on the pace ' of the Gadarene swine. Yet, with all the pessimism 
of his outlook upon the domestic future of popularly governed 
countries, it is curious to note how undoubtingly Carlyle shared the 
international optimism which was so prevalent in the year before 
the great " Exhibition of the Arts and Industries of All Nations." 
' As to foreign peace,' he writes, ' really all Europe now, especially 
with so many railroads, public journals, printed books, penny post, 
bills of exchange, and continual intercourse and mutual depend- 
ence, is more and more becoming (so to speak) one Parish.' ' So 
to speak ' indeed ! Carlyle goes on to admit that the Czar of 
Russia, in the ' Eastern part of the Parish ' may have less peaceful 
notions than the rest of the world, but he knows too well he 
must keep them to himself. So that 'in spite of editorial 
prophecy, the Czar of Russia does not disturb our night's rest.' 
Carlyle, it is true, was thinking of and deriding the idea of a 
Russian attack on Western Democracy, and not of a Russian 
intrigue against an effete Eastern despotism. But what a 
desperately unhappy forecast to have taken of an Europe 
which, little more than four years afterwards, saw three Great 
Powers at war ; and ere the next decade of the century had 



INTRODUCTION ix 

run half its course, had entered with the Austro- Prussian attack 
on Denmark upon that long era of unrest which shows no 
prospect of closing with the century. 

It is little to be wondered at that Latter-Day Pamphlets had a 
somewhat convulsive effect on Carlyle's Radical and revolutionary 
friends, and produced something like a positive enstrangement 
between him and such men as Mazzini and Mill. Perhaps in the 
latter case, and in the intensely ' Little England ' temper of the 
Radicalism of that day, the alienation was as much due to what 
was sound, sensible, and patriotic in the Pamphlets as to what was 
exaggerated and overstrained. Anyhow, it is pleasant for the 
Imperialist admirer of Carlyle in these days to be able to set-off 
against the melancholy prophetic failure just quoted a passage of 
such shrewdness and foresight and manly English spirit as that 
which I am about to quote : 

c And yet an instinct deeper than the Gospel of M'Croudy teaches 
all men that Colonies are worth something to a country ! That if, 
under the present Colonial Office, they are a vexation to us and them- 
selves, some other Colonial Office can and must be contrived which shall 
render them a blessing ; and that the remedy will be to contrive such a 
Colonial Office or method of administration, and by no means to cut the 
Colonies loose. Colonies are not to be picked off the street every day ; 
not a Colony of them but has been bought dear, well purchased by the 
toil and blood of those we have the honour to be sons of; and we cannot 
just afford to cut them away because M'Croudy finds the present manage- 
ment of them cost money. The present management will indeed require 
to be cut away ; but as for the Colonies, we purpose through Heaven's 
blessing to retain them a while yet ! Shame on us for unworthy sons of 
brave fathers if we do not. Brave fathers, by valiant blood and sweat, 
purchased for us, from the bounty of Heaven, rich possessions in all 
zones ; and we, wretched imbeciles, cannot do the function of ad- 
ministering them ? And because the accounts do not stand well in the 
ledger, our remedy is, not to take shame to ourselves, and repent in 
sackcloth and ashes, and amend our beggarly imbecilities and in- 
sincerities in that as in other departments of our business, but to fling 
the business overboard, and declare the business itself to be bad ? We 
are a hopeful set of heirs to a big fortune ! It does not suit our Manton 
gunneries, grouse-shootings, mousings in the City ; and like spirited 
young gentlemen we will give it up, and let the attorneys take it ? ' 



x LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 

Strange language this for the year 1850, though it is familiar 
enough to-day, or rather it has only ceased to be so because the 
very success of its reproofs has now rendered them superfluous. It 
is not without a melancholy pleasure that one quotes it, if only as 
a relief from the general impression that the volume, with all its 
spirit and eloquence and caustic irony, leaves behind it namely 
that the prophet's is one of the most perilous of all the profes- 
sions, and that for turning the wisdom of the wise to foolishness 
there is nothing so disastrously effective as the attempt to predict 
the mysterious course of the future. 

H. D. TRAILL. 



No. I 
THE PRESENT TIME 

[IST FEBRUARY 1850] 

THE Present Time, youngest-born of Eternity, child and heir 
of all the Past Times with their good and evil, and parent of 
all the Future, is ever a ' New Era ' to the thinking man ; 
and comes with new questions and significance, however 
commonplace it look : to know it, and what it bids us do, 
is ever the sum of knowledge for all of us. This new Day, 
sent us out of Heaven, this also has its heavenly omens ; 
amid the bustling trivialities and loud empty noises, its silent 
monitions, which, if we cannot read and obey, it will not be 
well with us ! No ; nor is there any sin more fearfully 
avenged on men and Nations than that same, which indeed 
includes and presupposes all manner of sins : the sin which 
our old pious fathers called 'judicial blindness'; which we, 
with our light habits, may still call misinterpretation of the 
Time that now is ; disloyalty to its real meanings and 
monitions, stupid disregard of these, stupid adherence active 
or passive to the counterfeits and mere current semblances 
of these. This is true of all times and days. 

But in the days that are now passing-over us, even fools 
are arrested to ask the meaning of them ; few of the genera- 
tions of men have seen more impressive days. Days of 
endless calamity, disruption, dislocation, confusion worse 
confounded : if they are not days of endless hope too, then 
they are days of utter despair. For it is not a small hope 
that will suffice, the ruin being clearly, either in action or in 
prospect, universal. There must be a new world, if there 
is to be any world at all ! That human things in our 



2 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Europe can ever return to the old sorry routine, and proceed 
with any steadiness or continuance there ; this small hope is 
not now a tenable one. These days of universal death must 
be days of universal newbirth, if the ruin is not to be total 
and final ! It is a Time to make the dullest man consider ; 
and ask himself, Whence he came ? Whither he is bound ? 
A veritable * New Era,' to the foolish as well as to the 
wise. 

Not long ago, the world saw, with thoughtless joy which 
might have been very thoughtful joy, a real miracle not here- 
tofore considered possible or conceivable in the world, a 
Reforming Pope. A simple pious creature, a good country- 
priest, invested unexpectedly with the tiara, takes up the New 
Testament, declares that this henceforth shall be his rule of 
governing. No more finesse, chicanery, hypocrisy, or false 
or foul dealing of any kind : God's truth shall be spoken, 
God's justice shall be done, on the throne called of St. Peter : 
an honest Pope, Papa, or Father of Christendom, shall 
preside there. And such a throne of St. Peter; and such 
a Christendom, for an honest Papa to preside in ! The 
European populations everywhere hailed the omen ; with 
shouting and rejoicing, leading -articles and tar- barrels; 
thinking people listened with astonishment, not with 
sorrow if they were faithful or wise ; with awe rather as at 
the heralding of death, and with a joy as of victory beyond 
death ! Something pious, grand and as if awful in that joy, 
revealing once more the Presence of a Divine Justice in this 
world. For, to such men it was very clear how this poor 
devoted Pope would prosper, with his New Testament in his 
hand. An alarming business, that of governing in the 
throne of St. Peter by the rule of veracity ! By the rule of 
veracity, the so-called throne of St. Peter was openly declared, 
above three-hundred years ago, to be a falsity, a huge 
mistake, a pestilent dead carcass, which this Sun was weary 
of. More than three hundred years ago, the throne of 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 3 

St. Peter received peremptory judicial notice to quit ; 
authentic order, registered in Heaven's chancery and since 
legible in the hearts of all brave men, to take itself away, 
to begone, and let us have no more to do with it and its 
delusions and impious deliriums ; and it has been sitting 
every day since, it may depend upon it, at its own peril 
withal, and will have to pay exact damages yet for every day 
it has so sat. Law of veracity ? What this Popedom had 
to do by the law of veracity, was to give-up its own foul 
galvanic life, an offence to gods and men ; honestly to die, 
and get itself buried ! 

Far from this was the thing the poor Pope undertook in 
regard to it ; and yet, on the whole, it was essentially this 
too. "Reforming Pope? 1 ' said one of our acquaintance, 
often in those weeks, "Was there ever such a miracle? 
About to break-up that hugh imposthume too, by ' curing' 
it ? Turgot and Necker were nothing to this. God is great ; 
and when a scandal is to end, brings some devoted man 
to take charge of it in hope, not in despair ! " But cannot 
he reform ? asked many simple persons ; to whom our friend 
in grim banter would reply : " Reform a Popedom, hardly. 
A wretched old kettle, ruined from top to bottom, and 
consisting mainly now of foul grime and rust: stop the 
holes of it, as your antecessors have been doing, with 
temporary putty, it may hang-together yet a while ; begin 
to hammer at it, solder at it, to what you call mend and 
rectify it, it will fall to sherds, as sure as rust is rust ; go 
all into nameless dissolution, and the fat in the fire will be 

a thing worth looking at, poor Pope ! " So accordingly 

it has proved. The poor Pope, amid felicitations and tar- 
barrels of various kinds, went on joyfully for a season : but 
he had awakened, he as no other man could do, the sleeping 
elements ; mothers of the whirlwinds, conflagrations, earth- 
quakes. Questions not very soluble at present, were even 
sages and heroes set to solve them, began everywhere with 
new emphasis to be asked. Questions which all official men 



4 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

wished, and almost hoped, to postpone till Doomsday. 
Doomsday itself had come ; that was the terrible truth ! 

For, sure enough, if once the law of veracity be acknow- 
ledged as the rule for human things, there will not anywhere 
be want of work for the reformer ; in very few places do 
human things adhere quite closely to that law ! Here was 
the Papa of Christendom proclaiming that such was actually 
the case ; whereupon all over Christendom such results as 
we have seen. The Sicilians, I think, were the first notable 
body that set-about applying this new strange rule sanctioned 
by the general Father ; they said to themselves, We do not 
by the law of veracity belong to Naples and these Neapolitan 
Officials ; we will, by favour of Heaven and the Pope, be free 
of these. Fighting ensued ; insurrection, fiercely maintained 
in the Sicilian Cities ; with much bloodshed, much tumult 
and loud noise, vociferation extending through all newspapers 
and countries. The effect of this, carried abroad by news- 
papers and rumour, was great in all places ; greatest perhaps 
in Paris, which for sixty years past has been the City of 
Insurrections. The French People had plumed themselves 
on being, whatever else they were not, at least the chosen 
* soldiers of liberty,' who took the lead of all creatures in that 
pursuit, at least ; and had become, as their orators, editors 
and litterateurs diligently taught them, a People whose 
bayonets were sacred, a kind of Messiah People, saving a 
blind world in its own despite, and earning for themselves 
a terrestrial and even celestial glory very considerable indeed. 
And here were the wretched downtrodden populations of 
Sicily risen to rival them, and threatening to take the trade 
out of their hand. 

No doubt of it, this hearing continually of the very Pope's 
glory as a Reformer, of the very Sicilians fighting divinely 
for liberty behind barricades, must have bitterly aggravated 
the feeling of every Frenchman, as he looked around him, at 
home, on a Louis-Philippism which had became the scorn of 
all the world. " Ichabod , is the glory departing from us ? 



L] THE PRESENT TIME 5 

Under the sun is nothing baser, by all accounts and evidences, 
than the system of repression and corruption, of shameless 
dishonesty and unbelief in anything but human baseness, that 
we now live under. The Italians, the very Pope, have 

become apostles of liberty, and France is what is 

France ! " We know what France suddenly became in the 
end of February next ; and by a clear enough genealogy, we 
can trace a considerable share in that event to the good 
simple Pope with the New Testament in his hand. An 
outbreak, or at least a radical change and even inversion of 
affairs hardly to be achieved without an outbreak, everybody 
felt was inevitable in France: but it had been universally 
expected that France would as usual take the initiative in 
that matter; and had there been no reforming Pope, no 
insurrectionary Sicily, France had certainly not broken-out 
then and so, but only afterwards and otherwise. The 
French explosion, not anticipated by the cunningest men 
there on the spot scrutinising it, burst-up unlimited, complete, 
defying computation or control. 

Close following which, as if by sympathetic subterranean 
electricities, all Europe exploded, boundless, uncontrollable ; 
and we had the year 1848, one of the most singular, disastrous, 
amazing, and, on the whole, humiliating years the European 
world ever saw. Not since the irruption of the Northern 
Barbarians has there been the like. Everywhere immeasur- 
able Democracy rose monstrous, loud, blatant, inarticulate as 
the voice of Chaos. Everywhere the Official holy-of-holies 
was scandalously laid bare to dogs and the profane : Enter, 
all the world, see what kind of Official holy it is. Kings 
everywhere, and reigning persons, stared in sudden horror, the 
voice of the whole world bellowing in their ear, " Begone, ye 
imbecile hypocrites, histrios not heroes ! Off with you, off ! " 
and, what was peculiar and notable in this year for the first 
time, the Kings all made haste to go, as if exclaiming, " We 
are poor histrios, we sure enough ; did you want heroes ? 
Don't kill us ; we couldn't help it ! " Not one of them 



6 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

turned round, and stood upon his Kingship, as upon a right 
he could afford to die for, or to risk his skin upon ; by no 
manner of means. That, I say, is the alarming peculiarity at 
present. Democracy, on this new occasion, finds all Kings 
conscious that they are but Playactors. The miserable mortals, 
enacting their High Life Below Stairs, with faith only that 
this Universe may perhaps be all a phantasm and hypocrisis, 
the truculent Constable of the Destinies suddenly enters : 
" Scandalous Phantasms, what do you here ? Are ' solemnly 
constituted Impostors ' the proper Kings of men ? Did you 
think the Life of Man was a grimacing dance of apes ? To 
be led always by the squeak of your paltry fiddle ? Ye 
miserable, this Universe is not an upholstery Puppet-play, but 
a terrible God's Fact ; and you, I think, had not you better 
begone ! " They fled precipitately, some of them with what 
we may call an exquisite ignominy, in terror of the treadmill 
or worse. And everywhere the people, or the populace, take 
their own government upon themselves ; and open * kingless- 
ness, 1 what we call anarchy, how happy if it be anarchy plus 
a street-constable ! is everywhere the order of the day. Such 
was the history, from Baltic to Mediterranean, in Italy, France, 
Prussia, Austria, from end to end of Europe, in those March 
days of 1848. Since the destruction of the old Roman 
Empire by inroad of the Northern Barbarians, I have known 
nothing similar. 

And so, then, there remained no King in Europe ; no King 
except the Public Haranguer, haranguing on barrel-head, in 
leading-article ; or getting himself aggregated into a National 
Parliament to harangue. And for about four months all 
France, and to a great degree all Europe, rough-ridden by 
every species of delirium, except happily the murderous for 
most part, was a weltering mob, presided over by M. de 
Lamartine at the H6tel-de-Ville ; a most eloquent fair-spoken 
literary gentleman, whom thoughtless persons took for a 
prophet, priest and heaven-sent evangelist, and whom a wise 
Yankee -friend of mine discerned to be properly c the first 



I.J THE PRESENT TIME 7 

stump-orator in the world, standing too on the highest stump, 
for the time.' A sorrowful spectacle to men of reflection, 
during the time he lasted, that poor M. de Lamartine ; with 
nothing in him but melodious wind and soft sowder, which he 
and others took for something divine and not diabolic ! Sad 
enough : the eloquent latest impersonation of Chaos-come- 
again ; able to talk for itself, and declare persuasively that it 
is Cosmos ! However, you have but to wait a little, in such 
cases ; all balloons do and must give-up their gas in the 
pressure of things, and are collapsed in a sufficiently wretched 
manner before long. 

And so in City after City, street-barricades are piled, and 
truculent, more or less murderous insurrection begins ; popu- 
lace after populace rises, King after King capitulates or 
absconds ; and from end to end of Europe Democracy has 
blazed-up explosive, much higher, more irresistible and less 
resisted than ever before ; testifying too sadly on what a 
bottomless volcano, or universal powder-mine of most inflam- 
mable mutinous chaotic elements, separated from us by a thin 
earth-rind, Society with all its arrangements and acquirements 
everywhere, in the present epoch, rests ! The kind of persons 
who excite or give signal to such revolutions, students, 
young men of letters, advocates, editors, hot inexperienced 
enthusiasts, or fierce and justly bankrupt desperadoes, acting 
everywhere on the discontent of the millions and blowing it 
into flame, might give rise to reflections as to the character 
of our epoch. Never till now did young men, and almost 
children, take such a command in human affairs. A changed 
time since the word Senior (Seigneur, or Elder) was first 
devised to signify ' lord, 1 or superior ; as in all languages of 
men we find it to have been ! Not an honourable document 
this either, as to the spiritual condition of our epoch. In 
times when men love wisdom, the old man will ever be vener- 
able, and be venerated, and reckoned noble : in tunes that 
love something else than wisdom, and indeed have little or no 
wisdom, and see little or none to love, the old man will cease 



8 LATTER- DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

to be venerated ; and looking more closely, also, you will find 
that in fact he has ceased to be venerable, and has begun to 
be contemptible ; a foolish boy still, a boy without the graces, 
generosities, and opulent strength of young boys. In these 
days, what of lordship or leadership is still to be done, the 
youth must do it, not the mature or aged man ; the mature 
man, hardened into sceptical egoism, knows no monition but 
that of his own frigid cautions, avarices, mean timidities ; and 
can lead nowhither towards an object that even seems noble. 
But to return. 

This mad state of matters will of course before long allay 
itself, as it has everywhere begun to do ; the ordinary necessi- 
ties of men's daily existence cannot comport with it, and these, 
whatever else is cast aside, will have their way. Some re- 
mounting, very temporary remounting, of the old machine, 
under new colours and altered forms, will probably ensue soon 
in most countries : the old histrionic Kings will be admitted 
back under conditions, under * Constitutions, 1 with national 
Parliaments, or the like fashionable adjuncts ; and everywhere 
the old daily life will try to begin again. But there is now 
no hope that such arrangements can be permanent ; that they 
can be other than poor temporary makeshifts, which, if they 
try to fancy and make themselves permanent, will be displaced 
by new explosions, recurring more speedily than last time. In 
such baleful oscillation, afloat as amid raging bottomless eddies 
and conflicting sea-currents, not steadfast as on fixed founda- 
tions, must European Society continue swaying, now disas- 
trously tumbling, then painfully readjusting itself, at ever 
shorter intervals, till once the new rock-basis does come to 
light, and the weltering deluges of mutiny, and of need to 
mutiny, abate again ! 

For universal Democracy, whatever we may think of it, has 
declared itself as an inevitable fact of the days in which we 
live ; and he who has any chance to instruct, or lead, in his 
days, must begin by admitting that : new street-barricades, and 



I.J THE PRESENT TIME 9 

new anarchies, still more scandalous if still less sanguinary, 
must return and again return, till governing persons everywhere 
know and admit that. Democracy, it may be said everywhere, 
is here : for sixty years now, ever since the grand or First 
French Revolution, that fact has been terribly announced to 
all the world ; in message after message, some of them very 
terrible indeed ; and now at last all the world ought really to 
believe it. That the world does believe it ; that even Kings 
now as good as believe it, and know, or with just terror sur- 
mise, that they are but temporary phantasm Playactors, and 
that Democracy is the grand, alarming, imminent and indis- 
putable Reality : this, among the scandalous phases we wit- 
nessed in the last two years, is a phasis full of hope : a sign 
that we are advancing closer and closer to the very Problem 
itself, which it will behove us to solve or die ; that all 
fighting and campaigning and coalitioning in regard to the 
existence of the Problem, is hopeless and superfluous hence- 
forth. The gods have appointed it so ; no Pitt, nor body of 
Pitts or mortal creatures can appoint it otherwise. Demo- 
cracy, sure enough, is here : one knows not how long it will 
keep hidden underground even in Russia; and here in 
England, though we object to it resolutely in the form of 
street-barricades and insurrectionary pikes, and decidedly will 
not open doors to it on those terms, the tramp of its million 
feet is on all streets and thoroughfares, the sound of its 
bewildered thousandfold voice is in all writings and speakings, 
in all thinkings and modes and activities of men : the soul 
that does not now, with hope or terror, discern it, is not the 
one we address on this occasion. 

What is Democracy ; this huge inevitable Product of the 
Destinies, which is everywhere the portion of our Europe in 
these latter days ? There lies the question for us. Whence 
comes it, this universal big black Democracy ; whither tends 
it ; what is the meaning of it ? A meaning it must have, or 
it would not be here. If we can find the right meaning of it, 
we may, wisely submitting or wisely resisting and controlling, 



10 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

still hope to live in the midst of it ; if we cannot find the 
right meaning, if we find only the wrong or no meaning in it, 
to live will not be possible ! The whole social wisdom of the 
Present Time is summoned, in the name of the Giver of 
Wisdom, to make clear to itself, and lay deeply to heart with 
an eye to strenuous valiant practice and effort, what the 
meaning of this universal revolt of the European Populations, 
which calls itself Democracy, and decides to continue perma- 
nent, may be. 

Certainly it is a drama full of action, event fast following 
event ; in which curiosity finds endless scope, and there are 
interests at stake, enough to rivet the attention of all men, 
simple and wise. Whereat the idle multitude lift-up their 
voices, gratulating, celebrating sky-high ; in rhyme and prose 
announcement, more than plentiful, that now the New Era, 
and long-expected Year One of Perfect Human Felicity has 
come. Glorious and immortal people, sublime French citizens, 
heroic barricades ; triumph of civil and religious liberty O 
Heaven ! one of the inevitablest private miseries, to an earnest 
man in such circumstances, is this multitudinous efflux of 
oratory and psalmody, from the universal foolish human 
throat ; drowning for the moment all reflection whatsoever, 
except the sorrowful one that you are fallen in an evil, heavy- 
laden, long-eared age, and must resignedly bear your part in 
the same. The front wall of your wretched old crazy dwelling, 
long denounced by you to no purpose, having at last fairly 
folded itself over, and fallen prostrate into the street, the 
floors, as may happen, will still hang-on by the mere beam- 
ends, and coherency of old carpentry, though in a sloping 
direction, and depend there till certain poor rusty nails and 
wormeaten dovetailings give way : but is it cheering, in 
such circumstances, that the whole household burst-forth into 
celebrating the new joys of light and ventilation, liberty and 
picturesqueness of position, and thank God that now they 
have got a house to their mind ? My dear household, cease 
singing and psalmodying; lay aside your fiddles, take out 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 11 

your work-implements, if you have any ; for I can say with 
confidence the laws of gravitation are still active, and rusty 
nails, wormeaten dovetailings, and secret coherency of old 
carpentry, are not the best basis for a household ! In the 
lanes of Irish cities, I have heard say, the wretched people 
are sometimes found living, and perilously boiling their 
potatoes, on such swing-floors and inclined planes hanging-on 
by the joist-ends ; but I did not hear that they sang very 
much in celebration of such lodging. No, they slid gently 
about, sat near the back wall, and perilously boiled their 
potatoes, in silence for most part ! 

High shouts of exultation, in every dialect, by every vehicle 
of speech and writing, rise from far and near over this last 
avatar of Democracy in 1848 : and yet, to wise minds, the 
first aspect it presents seems rather to be one of boundless 
misery and sorrow. What can be more miserable than this 
universal hunting-out of the high dignitaries, solemn func- 
tionaries, and potent, grave and reverend signiors of the 
world ; this stormful rising-up of the inarticulate dumb 
masses everywhere, against those who pretended to be speak- 
ing for them and guiding them ? These guides, then, were 
mere blind men only pretending to see ? These rulers were 
not ruling at all ; they had merely got-on the attributes and 
clothes of rulers, and were surreptitiously drawing the wages, 
while the work remained undone ? The Kings were Sham- 
Kings, playacting as at Drury Lane; and what were the 
people withal that took them for real ? 

It is probably the hugest disclosure of falsity in human 
things that was ever at one time made. These reverend 
Dignitaries that sat amid their far-shining symbols and long- 
sounding long -admitted professions, were mere Impostors, 
then ? Not a true thing they were doing, but a false thing. 
The story they told men was a cunningly-devised fable ; the 
gospels they preached to them were not an account of man's 
real position in this world, but an incoherent fabrication, 
of dead ghosts and unborn shadows, of traditions, cants, 



12 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

indolences, cowardices, a falsity of falsities, which at last 
ceases to stick together. Wilfully and against their will, 
these high units of mankind were cheats, then ; and the low 
millions who believed in them were dupes, a kind of inverse 
cheats, too, or they would not have believed in them so long. 
A universal Bankruptcy of Imposture ; that may be the brief 
definition of it Imposture everywhere declared once more to 
be contrary to Nature ; nobody will change its word into an 
act any farther: fallen insolvent; unable to keep its head 
up by these false pretences, or make its pot boil any more 
for the present ! A more scandalous phenomenon, wide as 
Europe, never afflicted the face of the sun. Bankruptcy 
everywhere ; foul ignominy, and the abomination of desola- 
tion, in all high places : odious to look upon, as the carnage 
of a battle-field on the morrow morning ; a massacre not of 
the innocents ; we cannot call it a massacre of the innocents ; 
but a universal tumbling of Impostors and of Impostures 
into the street ! 

Such a spectacle, can we call it joyful ? There is a joy in 
it, to the wise man too ; yes, but a joy full of awe, and as it 
were sadder than any sorrow, like the vision of immortality, 
unattainable except through death and the grave ! And yet 
who would not, in his heart of hearts, feel piously thankful 
that Imposture has fallen bankrupt ? By all means let it 
fall bankrupt ; in the name of God let it do so, with what- 
ever misery to itself and to all of us. Imposture, be it 
known then, known it must and shall be, -is hateful, 
unendurable to God and man. Let it understand this every- 
where ; and swiftly make ready for departure, wherever it yet 
lingers ; and let it learn never to return, if possible ! The 
eternal voices, very audibly again, are speaking to proclaim 
this message, from side to side of the world. Not a very 
cheering message, but a very indispensable one. 

Alas, it is sad enough that Anarchy is here ; that we are 
not permitted to regret its being here, for who that had, for 
this divine Universe, an eye which was human at all, could 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 13 

wish that Shams of any kind, especially that Sham-Kings 
should continue ? No : at all costs, it is to be prayed by all 
men that Shams may cease. Good Heavens, to what depths 
have we got, when this to many a man seems strange ! Yet 
strange to many a man it does seem ; and to many a solid 
Englishman, wholesomely digesting his pudding among what 
are called the cultivated classes, it seems strange exceedingly ; 
a mad ignorant notion, quite heterodox, and big with mere 
ruin. He has been used to decent forms long since fallen 
empty of meaning, to plausible modes, solemnities grown 
ceremonial, what you in your iconoclast humour call shams, 
all his life long ; never heard that there was any harm 
in them, that there was any getting-on without them. Did 
not cotton spin itself, beef grow, and groceries and spiceries 
come in from the East and the West, quite comfortably by 
the side of shams ? Kings reigned, what they were pleased 
to call reigning ; lawyers pleaded, bishops preached, and 
honourable members perorated ; and to crown the whole, as 
if it were all real and no sham there, did not scrip continue 
saleable, and the banker pay in bullion, or paper with a 
metallic basis ? " The greatest sham, I have always thought, 
is he that would destroy shams. 11 

Even so. To such depth have /, the poor knowing person 
of this epoch, got ; almost below the level of lowest 
humanity, and down towards the state of apehood and 
oxhood ! For never till in quite recent generations was such 
a scandalous blasphemy quietly set forth among the sons of 
Adam ; never before did the creature called man believe 
generally in his heart that lies were the rule in this Earth ; 
that in deliberate long-established lying could there be help 
or salvation for him, could there be at length other than 
hindrance and destruction for him. O Heavyside, my solid 
friend, this is the sorrow of sorrows : what on earth can 
become of us till this accursed enchantment, the general sum- 
mary and consecration of delusions, be cast forth from the 
heart and life of one and all ! Cast forth it will be ; it 



14 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

must, or we are tending at all moments, whitherward I do 
not like to name. Alas, and the casting of it out, to what 
heights and what depths will it lead us, in the sad universe 
mostly of lies and shams and hollow phantasms (grown very 
ghastly now), in which, as in a safe home, we have lived 
this century or two ! To heights and depths of social and 
individual divorce from delusions, of * reform ' in right sacred 
earnest, of indispensable amendment, and stern sorrowful 
abrogation and order to depart, such as cannot well be 
spoken at present ; as dare scarcely be thought at present ; 
which nevertheless are very inevitable, and perhaps rather 
imminent several of them ! Truly we have a heavy task of 
work before us ; and there is a pressing call that we should 
seriously begin upon it, before it tumble into an inextricable 
mass, in which there will be no working, but only suffering 
and hopelessly perishing ! 

Or perhaps Democracy, which we announce as now come, 
will itself manage it? Democracy, once modelled into 
suffrages, furnished with ballot-boxes and suchlike, will itself 
accomplish the salutary universal change from Delusive to 
Real, and make a new blessed world of us by and by ? To 
the great mass of men, I am aware, the matter presents itself 
quite on this hopeful side. Democracy they consider to be 
a kind of * Government.' The old model, formed long since, 
and brought to perfection in England now two hundred years 
ago, has proclaimed itself to all Nations as the new healing 
for every woe : " Set-up a Parliament, 11 the Nations every- 
where say, when the old King is detected to be a Sham-King, 
and hunted out or not ; " set-up a Parliament ; let us have 
suffrages, universal suffrages ; and all either at once or by due 
degrees will be right, and a real Millennium come ! " Such 
is their way of construing the matter. 

Such, alas, is by no means my way of construing the 
matter; if it were, I should have had the happiness of 
remaining silent, and been without call to speak here. It is 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 15 

because the contrary of all this is deeply manifest to me, 
and appears to be forgotten by multitudes of my contem- 
poraries, that I have had to undertake addressing a word to 
them. The contrary of all this ; and the farther I look 
into the roots of all this, the more hateful, ruinous and 
dismal does the state of mind all this could have originated 
in appear to me. To examine this recipe of a Parliament, 
how fit it is for governing Nations, nay, how fit it may now 
be, in these new times, for governing England itself where we 
are used to it so long : this, too, is an alarming inquiry, to 
which all thinking men, and good citizens of their country, 
who have an ear for the small still voices and eternal intima- 
tions, across the temporary clamours and loud blaring pro- 
clamations, are now solemnly invited. Invited by the rigorous 
fact itself; which will one day, and that perhaps soon, 
demand practical decision or redecision of it from us, with 
enormous penalty if we decide it wrong ! I think we shall 
all have to consider this question, one day ; better perhaps 
now than later, when the leisure may be less. If a Par- 
liament, with suffrages and universal or any conceivable kind 
of suffrages, is the method, then certainly let us set about 
discovering the kind of suffrages, and rest no moment till 
we have got them. But it is possible a Parliament may not 
be the method ! Possible the inveterate notions of the 
English People may have settled it as the method, and the 
Everlasting Laws of Nature may have settled it as not the 
method ! Not the whole method ; nor the method at all, 
if taken as the whole? If a Parliament with never such 
suffrages is not the method settled by this latter authority, 
then it will urgently behove us to become aware of that 
fact, and to quit such method; we may depend upon it, 
however unanimous we be, every step taken in that direction 
will, by the Eternal Law of things, be a step from improve- 
ment, not towards it. 

Not towards it, I say, if so ! Unanimity of voting, that 
will do nothing for us if so. Your ship cannot double Cape 



16 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Horn by its excellent plans of voting. The ship may vote 
this and that, above decks and below, in the most harmonious 
exquisitely constitutional manner : the ship, to get round 
Cape Horn, will find a set of conditions already voted for, 
and fixed with adamantine rigour by the ancient Elemental 
Powers, who are entirely careless how you vote. If you can, 
by voting or without voting, ascertain these conditions, and 
valiantly conform to them, you will get round the Cape : if 
you cannot, the ruffian Winds will blow you ever back 
again ; the inexorable Icebergs, dumb privy-councillors from 
Chaos, will nudge you with most chaotic ' admonition ' ; you 
will be flung half-frozen on the Patagonian cliffs, or ad- 
monished into shivers by your iceberg councillors, and sent 
sheer down to Davy Jones, and will never get round Cape 
Horn at all ! Unanimity on board ship ; yes, indeed, the 
ship's crew may be very unanimous, which doubtless, for the 
time being, will be very comfortable to the ship's crew, and 
to their Phantasm Captain if they have one : but if the tack 
they unanimously steer upon is guiding them into the belly 
of the Abyss, it will not profit them much ! Ships accord- 
ingly do not use the ballot-box at all ; and they reject the 
Phantasm species of Captains : one wishes much some other 
Entities, since all entities lie under the same rigorous set of 
laws, could be brought to show as much wisdom, and sense 
at least of self-preservation, the first command of Nature. 
Phantasm Captains with unanimous votings : this is considered 
to be all the law and all the prophets, at present. 

If a man could shake-out of his mind the universal noise 
of political doctors in this generation and in the last genera- 
tion or two, and consider the matter face to face, with his 
own sincere intelligence looking at it, I venture to say he 
would find this a very extraordinary method of navigating, 
whether in the Straits of Magellan or the undiscovered Sea 
of Time. To prosper in this world, to gain felicity, victory 
and improvement, either for a man or a nation, there is but 
one thing requisite, That the man or nation can discern what 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 17 

the true regulations of the Universe are in regard to him and 
his pursuit, and can faithfully and steadfastly follow these. 
These will lead him to victory ; whoever it may be that sets 
him in the way of these, were it Russian Autocrat, Chartist 
Parliament, Grand Lama. Force of Public Opinion, Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, M'Croudy the Seraphic Doctor with 
his Last-evangel of Political Economy, sets him in the sure 
way to please the Author of this Universe, and is his friend 
of friends. And again, whoever does the contrary is, for a 
like reason, his enemy of enemies. This may be taken as fixed. 
And now by what method ascertain the monition of the 
gods in regard to our affairs? How decipher, with best 
fidelity, the eternal regulation of the Universe; and read, 
from amid such confused embroilments of human clamour and 
folly, what the real Divine Message to us is ? A divine 
message, or eternal regulation of the Universe, there verily 
is, in regard to every conceivable procedure and affair of 
man : faithfully following this, said procedure or affair will 
prosper, and have the whole Universe to second it, and carry 
it, across the fluctuating contradictions, towards a victorious 
goal ; not following this, mistaking this, disregarding this, 
destruction and wreck are certain for every affair. How find 
it ? All the world answers me, " Count heads ; ask Universal 
Suffrage, by the ballot-boxes, and that will tell." Universal 
Suffrage, ballot-boxes, count of heads ? Well, I perceive 
we have got into strange spiritual latitudes indeed. Within 
the last half century or so, either the Universe or else the 
heads of men must have altered very much. Half a century 
ago, and down from Father Adam's time till then, the 
Universe, wherever I could hear tell of it, was wont to be of 
somewhat abstruse nature ; by no means carrying its secret 
written on its face, legible to every passer-by ; on the contrary, 
obstinately hiding its secret from all foolish, slavish, wicked, 
insincere persons, and partially disclosing it to the wise and 
noble-minded alone, whose number was not the majority in 
my time ! 






18 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Or perhaps the chief end of man being now, in these 
improved epochs, to make money and spend it, his interests 
in the Universe have become amazingly simplified of late ; 
capable of being voted-on with effect by almost anybody ? ' To 
buy in the cheapest market, and sell in the dearest ' : truly 
if that is the summary of his social duties, and the final 
divine-message he has to follow, we may trust him extensively 
to vote upon that. But if it is not, and never was, or can be ? 
If the Universe will not carry on its divine bosom any com- 
monwealth of mortals that have no higher aim, being still 
* a Temple and Hall of Doom, 1 not a mere Weaving-shop 
and Cattle-pen ? If the unfathomable Universe has decided 
to reject Human Beavers pretending to be Men ; and will 
abolish, pretty rapidly perhaps, in hideous mud-deluges, their 
' markets 1 and them, unless they think of it ? In that case 
it were better to think of it : and the Democracies and 
Universal Suffrages, I can observe, will require to modify 
themselves a good deal ! 

Historically speaking, I believe there was no Nation that 
could subsist upon Democracy. Of ancient Republics, and 
Demoi and Populi, we have heard much ; but it is now pretty 
well admitted to be nothing to our purpose ; a universal- 
suffrage republic, or a general-suffrage one, or any but a 
most-limited-suffrage one, never came to light, or dreamed of 
doing so, in ancient times. When the mass of the population 
were slaves, and the voters intrinsically a kind of Icings, or 
men born to rule others ; when the voters were real ' aristo- 
crats ' and manageable dependents of such, then doubtless 
voting, and confused jumbling of talk and intrigue, might, 
without immediate destruction, or the need of a Cavaignac to 
intervene with cannon and sweep the streets clear of it, go 
on ; and beautiful developments of manhood might be possible 
beside it, for a season. Beside it ; or even, if you will, by 
means of it, and in virtue of it, though that is by no means 
so certain as is often supposed. Alas, no : the reflective 
constitutional mind has misgivings as to the origin of old 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 19 

Greek and Roman nobleness ; and indeed knows not how this 
or any other human nobleness could well be ' originated,' or 
brought to pass, by voting or without voting, in this world, 
except by the grace of God very mainly ; and remembers, 
with a sigh, that of the Seven Sages themselves no fewer than 
three were bits of Despotic Kings, Tvpavvoi, * Tyrants ' so- 
called (such being greatly wanted there) ; and that the other 
four were very far from Red Republicans, if of any political 
faith whatever ! We may quit the Ancient Classical concern, 
and leave it to College-clubs and speculative debating-societies, 
in these late days. 

Of the various French Republics that have been tried, or 
that are still on trial, of these also it is not needful to say 
any word. But there is one modern instance of Democracy 
nearly perfect, the Republic of the United States, which has 
actually subsisted for threescore years or more, with immense 
success as is affirmed ; to which many still appeal, as to a sign 
of hope for all nations, and a ' Model Republic/ Is not 
America an instance in point ? Why should not all Nations 
subsist and flourish on Democracy, as America does ? 

Of America it would ill beseem any Englishman, and me 
perhaps as little as another, to speak unkindly, to speak 
unpatriotically, if any of us even felt so. Sure enough, 
America is a great, and in many respects a blessed and 
hopeful phenomenon. Sure enough, these hardy millions of 
Anglo-saxon men prove themselves worthy of their genealogy ; 
and, with the axe and plough and hammer, if not yet with 
any much finer kind of implements, are triumphantly clearing- 
out wide spaces, seedfields for the sustenance and refuge of 
mankind, arenas for the future history of the world ; doing, 
in their day and generation, a creditable and cheering feat 
under the sun. But as to a Model Republic, or a model 
anything, the wise among themselves know too well that 
there is nothing to be said. Naj, the title hitherto to be a 
Commonwealth or Nation at all, among the edvrj of the 
world, is, strictly considered, still a thing they are but 



20 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

striving for, and indeed have not yet done much towards 
attaining. Their Constitution, such as it may be, was made 
here, not there ; went over with them from the Old-Puritan 
English workshop ready-made. Deduct what they carried 
with them from England ready-made, their common English 
Language, and that same Constitution, or rather elixir of 
constitutions, their inveterate and now, as it were, inborn 
reverence for the Constable's Staff; two quite immense attain- 
ments, which England had to spend much blood, and valiant 
sweat of brow and brain, for centuries long, in achieving ; 
and what new elements of polity or nationhood, what noble 
new phasis of human arrangement, or social device worthy of 
Prometheus or of Epimetheus, yet comes to light in America ? 
Cotton-crops and Indian-corn and dollars come to light ; and 
half a world of untilled land, where populations that respect 
the constable can live, for the present without Government : 
this comes to light; and the profound sorrow of all nobler 
hearts, here uttering itself as silent patient unspeakable ennui, 
there coming out as vague elegiac wailings, that there is still 
next to nothing more. * Anarchy plus a street-constable ' : 
that also is anarchic to me, and other than quite lovely ! 

I foresee, too, that, long before the waste lands are full, 
the very street-constable, on these poor terms, will have 
become impossible : without the waste lands, as here in our 
Europe, I do not see how he could continue possible many 
weeks. Cease to brag to me of America, and its model 
institutions and constitutions. To men in their sleep there 
is nothing granted in this world : nothing, or as good as 
nothing, to men that sit idly caucusing and ballot-boxing on 
the graves of their heroic ancestors, saying, * It is well, it is 
well ! ' Corn and bacon are granted : not a very sublime 
boon, on such conditions ; a boon moreover which, on such 
conditions, cannot last ! No : America too will have to 
strain its energies, in quite other fashion than this ; to crack 
its sinews, and ail-but break its heart, as the rest of us have 
had to do, in thousandfold wrestle with the Pythons and 



I.J THE PRESENT TIME 21 

mud-demons, before it can become a habitation for the gods. 
America's battle is yet to fight ; and we, sorrowful though 
nothing doubting, will wish her strength for it. New 
Spiritual Pythons, plenty of them ; enormous Megatherions, 
as ugly as were ever born of mud, loom huge and hideous out 
of the twilight Future on America; and she will have her 
own agony, and her own victory, but on other terms than 
she is yet quite aware of. Hitherto she but ploughs and 
hammers, in a very successful manner ; hitherto, in spite of 
her * roast-goose with apple-sauce, 1 she is not much. * Roast- 
goose with apple-sauce for the poorest working-man ' : well, 
surely that is something, thanks to your respect for the 
street-constable, and to your continents of fertile waste land ; 
but that, even if it could continue, is by no means enough ; 
that is not even an instalment towards what will be required 
of you. My friend, brag not yet of our American cousins ! 
Their quantity of cotton, dollars, industry and resources, I 
believe to be almost unspeakable; but I can by no means 
worship the like of these. What great human soul, what 
great thought, what great noble thing that one could 
worship, or loyally admire, has yet been produced there? 
None : the American cousins have yet done none of these 
things. " What they have done ? " growls Smelfungus, tired 
of the subject : " They have doubled their population every 
twenty years. They have begotten, with a rapidity beyond 
recorded example, Eighteen Millions of the greatest bores 
ever seen in this world before, that hitherto is their feat in 
History ! " And so we leave them, for the present ; and 
cannot predict the success of Democracy, on this side of the 
Atlantic, from their example. 

Alas, on this side of the Atlantic and on that, Democracy, 
we apprehend, is forever impossible ! So much, with certainty 
of loud astonished contradiction from all manner of men at 
present, but with sure appeal to the Law of Nature and the 
ever-abiding Fact, may be suggested and asserted once more. 
The Universe itself is a Monarchy and Hierarchy; large 



22 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

liberty of * voting ' there, all manner of choice, utmost free- 
will, but with conditions inexorable and immeasurable annexed 
to every exercise of the same. A most free commonwealth of 

* voters ' ; but with Eternal Justice to preside over it, Eternal 
Justice enforced by Almighty Power ! This is the model of 

* constitutions ' ; this : nor in any Nation where there has not 
yet (in some supportable and withal some constantly-increasing 
degree) been confided to the Noblest, with his select series of 
Nobler, the divine everlasting duty of directing and control- 
ling the Ignoble, has the * Kingdom of God,' which we all 
pray for, * come, 1 nor can * His will ' even tend to be ' done on 
Earth as it is in Heaven ' till then. My Christian friends, 
and indeed my Sham- Christian and Anti-Christian, and all 
manner of men, are invited to reflect on this. They will find 
it to be the truth of the case. The Noble in the high place, 
the Ignoble in the low ; that is, in all times and in all 
countries, the Almighty Maker's Law. 

To raise the Sham-Noblest, and solemnly consecrate him by 
whatever method, new-devised, or slavishly adhered to from 
old wont, this, little as we may regard it, is, in all times and 
countries, a practical blasphemy, and Nature will in no wise 
forget it. Alas, there lies the origin, the fatal necessity, of 
modern Democracy everywhere. It is the Noblest, not the 
Sham-Noblest; it is God- Almighty's Noble, not the Court- 
Tailor's Noble, nor the Able-Editor's Noble, that must in 
some approximate degree, be raised to the supreme place ; he 
and not a counterfeit, under penalties ! Penalties deep as 
death, and at length terrible as hell-on-earth, my consti- 
tutional friend ! Will the ballot-box raise the Noblest to the 
chief place ; does any sane man deliberately believe such a 
thing? That nevertheless is the indispensable result, attain 
it how we may : if that is attained, all is attained ; if not 
that, nothing. He that cannot believe the ballot-box to be 
attaining it, will be comparatively indifferent to the ballot- 
box. Excellent for keeping the ship's crew at peace under 
their Phantasm Captain ; but unserviceable, under such, for 



I.J THE PRESENT TIME 23 

getting round Cape Horn. Alas, that there should be human 
beings requiring to have these things argued of, at this late 
time of day ! 

I say, it is the everlasting privilege of the foolish to be 
governed by the wise ; to be guided in the right path by 
those who know it better than they. This is the first ' right 
of man'; compared with which all other rights are as nothing, 
mere superfluities, corollaries which will follow of their own 
accord out of this ; if they be not contradictions to this, and 
less than nothing ! To the wise it is not a privilege ; far 
other indeed. Doubtless, as bringing preservation to their 
country, it implies preservation of themselves withal ; but 
intrinsically it is the harshest duty a wise man, if he be indeed 
wise, has laid to his hand. A duty which he would fain 
enough shirk ; which accordingly, in these sad times of doubt 
and cowardly sloth, he has long everywhere been endeavouring 
to reduce to its minimum, and has in fact in most cases 
nearly escaped altogether. It is an ungoverned world ; a 
world which we flatter ourselves will henceforth need no 
governing. On the dust of our heroic ancestors we too sit 
ballot-boxing, saying to one another, It is well, it is well ! 
By inheritance of their noble struggles, we have been per- 
mitted to sit slothful so long. By noble toil, not by shallow 
laughter and vain talk, they made this English Existence 
from a savage forest into an arable inhabitable field for us ; 
and we, idly dreaming it would grow spontaneous crops for- 
ever, find it now in a too questionable state ; peremptorily 
requiring real labour and agriculture again. Real * agri- 
culture' is not pleasant ; much pleasanter to reap and winnow 
(with ballot-box or otherwise) than to plough ! 

Who would govern that can get along without governing ? 
He that is fittest for it, is of all men the unwillingest unless 
constrained. By multifarious devices we have been endeavour- 
ing to dispense with governing ; and by very superficial 
speculations, of laissez-faire, supply-and-demand, etc. etc. to 
persuade ourselves that it is best so. The Real Captain, 



24 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

unless it be some Captain of mechanical Industry hired by 
Mammon, where is he in these days ? Most likely, in silence, 
in sad isolation somewhere, in remote obscurity ; trying if, in 
an evil ungoverned time, he cannot at least govern himself. 
The Real Captain undiscoverable ; the Phantasm Captain 
everywhere very conspicuous : it is thought Phantasm 
Captains, aided by ballot-boxes, are the true method, after 
all. They are much the pleasantest for the time being ! 
And so no Dux or Duke of any sort, in any province of our 
affairs, now leads : the Duke's Bailiff leads, what little leading 
is required for getting-in the rents ; and the Duke merely 
rides in the state-coach. It is everywhere so : and now at 
last we see a world all rushing towards strange consumma- 
tions, because it is and has long been so ! 



I do not suppose any reader of mine, or many persons in 
England at all, have much faith in Fraternity, Equality and 
the Revolutionary Millenniums preached by the French 
Prophets in this age : but there are many movements here 
too which tend inevitably in the like direction ; and good 
men, who would stand aghast at Red Republic and its 
adjuncts, seem to me travelling at full speed towards that or 
a similar goal ! Certainly the notion everywhere prevails 
among us too, and preaches itself abroad in every dialect, 
uncontradicted anywhere so far as I can hear, That the grand 
panacea for social woes is what we call * enfranchisement,' 
'emancipation'; or, translated into practical language, the 
cutting asunder of human relations, wherever they are found 
grievous, as is like to be pretty universally the case at the 
rate we have been going for some generations past. Let us 
all be * free ' of one another ; we shall then be happy. Free, 
without bond or connection except that of cash payment ; 
fair day's wages for the fair day's work ; bargained for by 
voluntary contract, and law of supply-and-demand : this is 



I.J THE PRESENT TIME 25 

thought to be the true solution of all difficulties and in- 
justices that have occurred between man and man. 

To rectify the relation that exists between two men, is 
there no method, then, but that of ending it? The old 
relation has become unsuitable, obsolete, perhaps unjust; it 
imperatively requires to be amended ; and the remedy is, 
Abolish it, let there henceforth be no relation at all. From 
the * Sacrament of Marriage ' downwards, human beings used 
to be manifoldly related, one to another, and each to all ; 
and there was no relation among human beings, just or 
unjust, that had not its grievances and difficulties, its neces- 
sities on both sides to bear and forbear. But henceforth, be 
it known, we have changed all that, by favour of Heaven : 
' the voluntary principle ' has come-up, which will itself do 
the business for us ; and now let a new Sacrament, that of 
Divorce, which we call emancipation, and spout-of on our 
platforms, be universally the order of the day ! Have men 
considered whither all this is tending, and what it certainly 
enough betokens ? Cut every human relation which has any- 
where grown uneasy sheer asunder; reduce whatsoever was 
compulsory to voluntary, whatsoever was permanent among 
us to the condition of nomadic : in other words, loosen 
by assiduous wedges in every joint, the whole fabric of 
social existence, stone from stone ; till at last, all now 
being loose enough, it can, as we already see in most 
countries, be overset by sudden outburst of revolutionary 
rage ; and, lying as mere mountains of anarchic rubbish, 
solicit you to sing Fraternity etc. over it, and to rejoice 
in the new remarkable era of human progress we have 
arrived at. 

Certainly Emancipation proceeds with rapid strides among 
us, this good while ; and has got to such a length as might 
give rise to reflections in men of a serious turn. West- 
Indian Blacks are emancipated, and it appears refuse to work : 
Irish Whites have long been entirely emancipated ; and 
nobody asks them to work, or on condition of finding them 



36 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

potatoes (which, of course, is indispensable), permits them to 
work. Among speculative persons, a question has sometimes 
risen : In the progress of Emancipation, are we to look for a 
time when all the Horses also are to be emancipated, and 
brought to the supply-and-demand principle? Horses too 
have ' motives ' ; are acted-on by hunger, fear, hope, love of 
oats, terror of platted leather ; nay, they have vanity, ambition, 
emulation, thankfulness, vindictiveness ; some rude outline of 
all our human spiritualities, a rude resemblance to us in 
mind and intelligence, even as they have in bodily frame. 
The Horse, poor dumb four-footed fellow, he too has his 
private feelings, his affections, gratitudes ; and deserves good 
usage ; no human master, without crime, shall treat him 
unjustly either, or recklessly lay-on the whip where it is not 
needed : I am sure if I could make him ' happy, 1 I should 
be willing to grant a small vote (in addition to the late 
twenty millions) for that object ! 

Him too you occasionally tyrannise over; and with bad 
result to yourselves, among others ; using the leather in a 
tyrannous unnecessary manner ; withholding, or scantily 
furnishing, the oats and ventilated stabling that are due. 
Rugged horse-subduers, one fears they are a little tyrannous 
at times. ' Am I not a horse, and half-brother ? ' To 
remedy which, so far as remediable, fancy the horses all 
' emancipated ' ; restored to their primeval right of property 
in the grass of this Globe : turned-out to graze in an inde- 
pendent supply-and-demand manner ! So long as grass lasts, 
I dare say they are very happy, or think themselves so. And 
Farmer Hodge sallying forth, on a dry spring morning, with 
a sieve of oats in his hand, and agony of eager expectation in 
his heart, is he happy ? Help me to plough this day, Black 
Dobbin : oats in full measure if thou wilt. * Hlunh, No 
thank ! ' snorts Black Dobbin ; he prefers glorious liberty 
and the grass. Bay Darby, wilt not thou perhaps ? 'Hlunh!* 
Gray Joan, then, my beautiful broad-bottomed mare, O 
Heaven, she too answers Hlunh ! Not a quadruped of them 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 27 

will plough a stroke for me. Corn-crops are ended in this 
world ! For the sake, if not of Hodge, then of Hodge's 
horses, one prays this benevolent practice might now cease, 
and a new and better one try to begin. Small kindness to 
Hodge's horses to emancipate them ! The fate of all emanci- 
pated horses is, sooner or later, inevitable. To have in this 
habitable Earth no grass to eat, in Black Jamaica gradually 
none, as in White Connemara already none ; to roam aim- 
less, wasting the seed-fields of the world; and be hunted 
home to Chaos, by the due watch-dogs and due hell-dogs, 
with such horrors of forsaken wretchedness as were never seen 
before ! These things are not sport ; they are terribly true, 
in this country at this hour. 

Between our Black West Indies and our White Ireland, 
between these two extremes of lazy refusal to work, and of 
famishing inability to find any work, what a world have we 
made of it, with our fierce Mammon-worships, and our 
benevolent philanderings, and idle godless nonsenses of one 
kind and another ! Supply-and-demand, Leave-it-alone, 
Voluntary Principle, Time will mend it :- till British in- 
dustrial existence seems fast becoming one huge poison-swamp 
of reeking pestilence physical and moral ; a hideous living 
Golgotha of souls and bodies buried alive; such a Curtius 1 
gulf, communicating with the Nether Deeps, as the Sun never 
saw till now. These scenes, which the Morning- Chronicle 
is bringing home to all minds of men, thanks to it for 
a service such as Newspapers have seldom done, ought 
to excite unspeakable reflections in every mind. Thirty- 
thousand outcast Needlewomen working themselves swiftly 
to death ; three-million Paupers rotting in forced idleness, 
helping- said Needlewomen to die : these are but items in the 
sad ledger of despair. 

Thirty-thousand wretched women, sunk in that putrefying 
well of abominations ; they have oozed-in upon London, from 
the universal Stygian quagmire of British industrial life ; are 
accumulated in the well of the concern, to that extent. 



88 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

British charity is smitten to the heart, at the laying-bare 
of such a scene; passionately undertakes, by enormous sub- 
scription of money, or by other enormous effort, to redress 
that individual horror ; as I and all men hope it may. But, 
alas, what next ? This general well and cesspool once baled 
clean out today, will begin before night to fill itself anew. 
The universal Stygian quagmire is still there ; opulent in 
women ready to be ruined, and in men ready. Towards the 
same sad cesspool will these waste currents of human ruin 
ooze and gravitate as heretofore; except in draining the 
universal quagmire itself there is no remedy. " And for that, 
what is the method ? " cry many in an angry manner. To 
whom, for the present, I answer only, " Not * emancipation, 1 
it would seem, my friends ; not the cutting-loose of human 
ties, something far the reverse of that ! " 

Many things have been written about shirtmaking; but 
here perhaps is the saddest thing of all, not written anywhere 
till now, that I know of. Shirts by the thirty-thousand are 
made at twopence-halfpenny each ; and in the mean while 
no needlewoman, distressed or other, can be procured in 
London by any housewife to give, for fair wages, fair help 
in sewing. Ask any thrifty house-mother, high or low, and 
she will answer. In high houses and in low, there is the 
same answer : no real needlewoman, ' distressed ' or other, has 
been found attainable in any of the houses I frequent. 
Imaginary needlewomen, who demand considerable wages, and 
have a deepish appetite for beer and viands, I hear of every- 
where ; but their sewing proves too often a distracted pucker- 
ing and botching ; not sewing, only the fallacious hope of it, 
a fond imagination of the mind. Good sempstresses are to 
be hired in every village ; and in London, with its famishing 
thirty-thousand, not at all, or hardly. Is not No-government 
beautiful in human business ? To such length has the Leave- 
alone principle carried it, by way of organising labour, in this 
affair of shirtmaking. Let us hope the Leave-alone principle 
has now got its apotheosis ; and taken wing towards higher 



I.J THE PRESENT TIME 29 

regions than ours, to deal henceforth with a class of affairs 
more appropriate for it ! 

Reader, did you ever hear of 'Constituted Anarchy 1 ? 
Anarchy ; the choking, sweltering, deadly and killing rule of 
No-rule ; the consecration of cupidity, and braying folly, and 
dim stupidity and baseness, in most of the affairs of men? 
Slopshirts attainable three-halfpence cheaper, by the ruin of 
living bodies and immortal souls ? Solemn Bishops and high 
Dignitaries, our divine 'Pillars of Fire by night,* debating 
meanwhile, with their largest wigs and gravest look, upon 
something they call 'prevenient grace 1 ? Alas, our noble 
men of genius, Heaven's real messengers to us, they also 
rendered nearly futile by the wasteful time ; preappointed 
they everywhere, and assiduously trained by all their peda- 
gogues and monitors, to 'rise in Parliament,' to compose 
orations, write books, or in short speak words, for the 
approval of reviewers ; instead of doing real kingly work to 
be approved of by the gods ! Our ' Government,' a highly 
* responsible ' one ; responsible to no God that I can hear of, 
but to the twenty-seven million gods of the shilling gallery. 
A Government tumbling and drifting on the whirlpools and 
mud-deluges, floating atop in a conspicuous manner, no- 
whither, like the carcass of a drowned ass. Authentic 
Chaos come up into this sunny Cosmos again ; and all men 
singing Gloria in excelsis to it. In spirituals and temporals, 
in field and workshop, from Manchester to Dorsetshire, from 
Lambeth Palace to the Lanes of Whitechapel, wherever men 
meet and toil and traffic together, Anarchy, Anarchy ; and 
only the street-constable (though with ever-increasing diffi- 
culty) still maintaining himself in the middle of it; that 
so, for one thing, this blessed exchange of slop-shirts for the 
souls of women may transact itself in a peaceable manner ! 
I, for my part, do profess myself in eternal opposition to this, 
and discern well that universal Ruin has us in the wind, unless 
we can get out of this. My friend Crabbe, in a late number 
of his Intermittent Radiator, pertinently enough exclaims : 



30 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

* When shall we have done with all this of British Liberty, 
Voluntary Principle, Dangers of Centralisation, and the like ? 
It is really getting too bad. For British Liberty, it seems, 
the people cannot be taught to read. British Liberty, 
shuddering to interfere with the rights of capital, takes six 
or eight millions of money annually to feed the idle labourer 
whom it dare not employ. For British Liberty we live over 
poisonous cesspools, gully-drains, and detestable abominations ; 
and omnipotent London cannot sweep the dirt out of itself. 
British Liberty produces what ? Floods of Hansard Debates 
every year, and apparently little else at present. If these 
are the results of British Liberty, I, for one, move we should 
lay it on the shelf a little, and look-out for something other 
and farther. We have achieved British Liberty hundreds of 
years ago ; and are fast growing, on the strength of it, one 
of the most absurd populations the Sun, among his great 
Museum of Absurdities, looks down upon at present. 1 

Curious enough : the model of the world just now is 
England and her Constitution ; all Nations striving towards 
it : poor France swimming these last sixty years in seas of 
horrid dissolution and confusion, resolute to attain this 
blessedness of free voting, or to die in chase of it. Prussia 
too, solid Germany itself, has all broken out into crackling 
of musketry, loud pamphleteering and Frankfort parliament- 
ing and palavering ; Germany too will scale the sacred 
mountains, how steep soever, and, by talisman of ballot-box, 
inhabit a political Elysium henceforth. All the Nations 
have that one hope. Very notable, and rather sad to the 
humane onlooker. For it is sadly conjectured, all the 
Nations labour somewhat under a mistake as to England, 
and the causes of her freedom and her prosperous cotton- 
spinning; and have much misread the nature of her Parlia- 
ment, and the effect of ballot-boxes and universal-suffrages 
there. 

What if it were because the English Parliament was from 



L] THE PRESENT TIME 31 

the first, and is only just now ceasing to be, a Council of 
actual Rulers, real Governing Persons (called Peers, Mitred 
Abbots, Lords, Knights of the Shire, or howsoever called), 
actually ruling- each his section of the country, and possess- 
ing (it must be said) in the lump, or when assembled as a 
Council, uncommon patience, devoutness, probity, discretion 
and good fortune, that the said Parliament ever came to be 
good for much ? In that case it will not be easy to ' imitate ' 
the English Parliament ; and the ballot-box and suffrage will 
be the mere bow of Robin Hood, which it is given to very 
few to bend, or shoot with to any perfection. And if the 
Peers become mere big Capitalists, Railway Directors, gigantic 
Hucksters, Kings of Scrip, without lordly quality, or other 
virtue except cash ; and the Mitred Abbots change to mere 
Able-Editors, masters of Parliamentary Eloquence, Doctors 
of Political Economy, and suchlike ; and all have to be 
elected by a universal-suffrage ballot-box, I do not see how 
the English Parliament itself will long continue sea- worthy ! 
Nay, I find England in her own big dumb heart, wherever 
you come upon her in a silent meditative hour, begins to 
have dreadful misgivings about it. 

The model of the world, then, is at once unattainable by 
the world, and not much worth attaining ? England, as I 
read the omens, is now called a second time to ' show the 
Nations how to live ' ; for by her Parliament, as chief govern- 
ing entity, I fear she is not long for this world ! Poor 
England must herself again, in these new strange times, the 
old methods being quite worn out, * learn how to live. 1 
That now is the terrible problem for England, as for all the 
Nations ; and she alone of all, not yet sunk into open 
Anarchy, but left with time for repentance and amendment ; 
she, wealthiest of all in material resource, in spiritual energy, 
in ancient loyalty to law, and in the qualities that yield such 
loyalty, she perhaps alone of all may be able, with huge 
travail, and the strain of all her faculties, to accomplish 
some solution. She will have to try it, she has now to try 



32 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

it ; she must accomplish it, or perish from her place in the 
world ! 

England, as I persuade myself, still contains in it many 
Icings ; possesses, as Old Rome did, many men not needing 
* election' to command, but eternally elected for it by the 
Maker Himself. England's one hope is in these, just now. 
They are among the silent, I believe ; mostly far away from 
platforms and public palaverings ; not speaking forth the 
image of their nobleness in transitory words, but imprinting 
it, each on his own little section of the world, in silent facts, 
in modest valiant actions, that will endure forevermore. They 
must sit silent no longer. They are summoned to assert 
themselves ; to act forth, and articulately vindicate, in the 
teeth of howling multitudes, of a world too justly maddened 
into all manner of delirious clamours, what of wisdom they 
derive from God. England, and the Eternal Voices, summon 
them ; poor England never so needed them as now. Up, be 
doing everywhere : the hour of crisis has verily come ! In all 
sections of English life, the god-made king is needed ; is 
pressingly demanded in most ; in some, cannot longer, with- 
out peril as of conflagration, be dispensed with. He, where- 
soever he finds himself, can say, " Here too am I wanted ; 
here is the kingdom I have to subjugate, and introduce 
God's Laws into, God's Laws, instead of Mammon's and 
M'Croudy's and the Old Anarch's ! Here is my work, here 

or nowhere." Are there many such, who will answer to 

the call, in England ? It turns on that, whether England, 
rapidly crumbling in these very years and months, shall go 
down to the Abyss as her neighbours have all done, or survive 
to new grander destinies without solution of continuity ! 
Probably the chief question of the world at present. 

The true * commander ' and king ; he who knows for him- 
self the divine Appointments of this Universe, the Eternal 
Laws ordained by God the Maker, in conforming to which 
lies victory and felicity, in departing from which lies, and 
forever must lie, sorrow and defeat, for each and all of the 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 83 

Posterity of Adam in every time and every place ; he who 
has sworn fealty to these, and dare alone against the world 
assert these, and dare not with the whole world at his back 
deflect from these ; he, I know too well, is a rare man. 
Difficult to discover ; not quite discoverable, I apprehend, by 
manoeuvring of ballot-boxes, and riddling of the popular 
clamour according to the most approved methods. He is 
not sold at any shop I know of, though sometimes, as at 
the sign of the Ballot-box, he is advertised for sale. Difficult 
indeed to discover : and not very much assisted, or encouraged 
in late times, to discover himself; which, I think, might be 
a kind of help ? Encouraged rather, and commanded in all 
ways, if he be wise, to hide himself, and give place to the 
windy Counterfeit of himself ; such as the universal-suffrages 
can recognise, such as loves the most sweet voices of the 
universal-suffrages ! O Peter, what becomes of such a People; 
what can become ? 

Did you never hear, with the mind's ear as well, that 
fateful Hebrew Prophecy, I think the fatefulest of all, which 
sounds daily through the streets, " Ou' clo" 1 ! Ou' clo' ! " A 
certain People, once upon a time, clamorously voted by over- 
whelming majority, " Not he ; Barabbas, not he ! Him, and 
what he is, and what he deserves, we know well enough : a 
reviler of the Chief Priests and sacred Chancery wigs ; a 
seditious Heretic, physical-force Chartist, and enemy of his 
country and mankind : To the gallows and the cross with 
him ! Barabbas is our man ; Barabbas, we are for Barabbas ! " 
They got Barabbas : have you well considered what a fund 
of purblind obduracy, of opaque jlunkyism grown truculent 
and transcendent ; what an eye for the phylacteries, and want 
of eye for the eternal noblenesses ; sordid loyalty to the 
prosperous Semblances, and high-treason against the Supreme 
Fact, such a vote betokens in these natures ? For it was the 
consummation of a long series of such ; they and their fathers 
had long kept voting so. A singular People; who could 
both produce such divine men, and then could so stone and 

c 



34 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

crucify them ; a People terrible from the beginning ! Well, 
they got Barabbas ; and they got, of course, such guidance as 
Barabbas and the like of him could give them ; and, of 
course, they stumbled ever downwards and devilwards, in their 
truculent stiffnecked way ; and and, at this hour, after 
eighteen centuries of sad fortune, they prophetically sing 
" Ou' clo" 1 ! " in all the cities of the world. Might the world, 
at this late hour, but take note of them, and understand 
their song a little ! 

Yes, there are some things the universal-suffrage can 
decide, and about these it will be exceedingly useful to 
consult the universal-suffrage : but in regard to most things 
of importance, and in regard to the choice of men especially, 
there is (astonishing as it may seem) next to no capability on 
the part of universal-suffrage. I request all candid persons, 
who have never so little originality of mind, and every man 
has a little, to consider this. If true, it involves such a 
change in our now-fashionable modes of procedure as fills me 
with astonishment and alarm. If popular suffrage is not the 
way of ascertaining what the Laws of the Universe are, and 
who it is that will best guide us in the way of these, then 
woe is to us if we do not take another method. Delolme on 
the British Constitution will not save us ; deaf will the Parcae 
be to votes of the House, to leading-articles, constitutional 
philosophies. The other method alas, it involves a stopping 
short, or vital change of direction, in the glorious career 
which all Europe, with shouts heaven-high, is now galloping 
along : and that, happen when it may, will, to many of us, be 
probably a rather surprising business ! 

One thing I do know, and can again assert with great 
confidence, supported by the whole Universe, and by some 
Two-hundred generations of men, who have left us some 
record of themselves there, That the few Wise will have, by 
one method or another, to take command of the innumerable 
Foolish ; that they must be got to take it ; and that, in 
fact, since Wisdom, which means also Valour and heroic 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 35 

Nobleness, is alone strong in this world, and one wise man is 
stronger than all men unwise, they can be got. That they 
must take it ; and having taken, must keep it, and do their 
GodVMessage in it, and defend the same, at their life's peril, 
against all men and devils. This I do clearly believe to be 
the backbone of all Future Society, as it has been of all Past ; 
and that without it, there is no Society possible in the world. 
And what a business this will be, before it end in some degree 
of victory again, and whether the time for shouts of triumph 
and tremendous cheers upon it is yet come, or not yet by a 
great way, I perceive too well ! A business to make us all 
very serious indeed. A business not to be accomplished but 
by noble manhood, and devout all-daring, all-enduring loyalty 
to Heaven, such as fatally sleeps at present, such as is not 
dead at present either, unless the gods have doomed this 
world of theirs to die ! A business which long centuries of 
faithful travail and heroic agony, on the part of all the noble 
that are born to us, will not end ; and which to us, of this 
* tremendous cheering ' century, it were blessedness very great 
to see successfully begun. Begun, tried by all manner of 
methods, if there is one wise Statesman or man left among us, 
it verily must be ; begun, successfully or unsuccessfully, we do 
hope to see it ! 



In all European countries, especially in England, one class 
of Captains and commanders of men, recognisable as the 
beginning of a new real and not imaginary * Aristocracy, 1 has 
already in some measure developed itself: the Captains of 
Industry ; happily the class who above all, or at least first 
of all, are wanted in this time. In the doing of material 
work, we have already men among us that can command 
bodies of men. And surely, on the other hand, there is no 
lack of men needing to be commanded : the sad class of 
brother-men whom we had to describe as ( Hodge's emanci- 
pated horses," 1 reduced to roving famine, this too has in all 



36 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

countries developed itself; and, in fatal geometrical pro- 
gression, is ever more developing itself, with a rapidity which 
alarms every one. On this ground, if not on all manner of 
other grounds, it may be truly said, the * Organisation of 
Labour' (not organisable by the mad methods tried hitherto) 
is the universal vital Problem of the world. 

To bring these hordes of outcast captainless soldiers under 
due captaincy ? This is really the question of questions ; on 
the answer to which turns, among other things, the fate of all 
Governments, constitutional and other, the possibility of 
their continuing to exist, or the impossibility. Captainless, 
uncommanded, these wretched outcast * soldiers, 1 since they 
cannot starve, must needs become banditti, street-barricaders, 
destroyers of every Government that cannot put them 
under captains, and send them upon enterprises, and in short 
render life human to them. Our English plan of Poor Laws, 
which we once piqued ourselves upon as sovereign, is evidently 
fast breaking down. Ireland, now admitted into the Idle 
Workhouse, is rapidly bursting it in pieces. That never was 
a * human ' destiny for any honest son of Adam ; nowhere but 
in England could it have lasted at all ; and now, with Ireland 
sharer in it, and the fulness of time come, it is as good as 
ended. Alas, yes. Here in Connemara, your crazy Ship of 
the State, otherwise dreadfully rotten in many of its timbers 
I believe, has sprung a leak : spite of all hands at the pump, 
the water is rising ; the Ship, I perceive, will founder, if you 
cannot stop this leak ! 

To bring these Captainless under due captaincy? The 
anxious thoughts of all men that do think are turned upon 
that question ; and their efforts, though as yet blindly and to 
no purpose, under the multifarious impediments and obscura- 
tions, all point thitherward. Isolated men, and their vague 
efforts, cannot do it. Government everywhere is called upon, 
in England as loudly as elsewhere, to give the initiative. 
A new strange task of these new epochs ; which no Govern- 
ment, never so * constitutional,' can escape from undertaking. 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 37 

For it is vitally necessary to the existence of Society itself ; it 
must be undertaken, and succeeded in too, or worse will 
follow, and, as we already see in Irish Connaught and some 
other places, will follow soon. To whatever thing still calls 
itself by the name of Government, were it never so constitu- 
tional and impeded by official impossibilities, all men will 
naturally look for help, and direction what to do, in this 
extremity. If help or direction is not given ; if the thing 
called Government merely drift and tumble to and fro, no- 
whither, on the popular vortexes, like some carcass of a 
drowned ass, constitutionally put * at the top of affairs, 
popular indignation will infallibly accumulate upon it; one 
day, the popular lightning, descending forked and horrible 
from the black air, will annihilate said supreme carcass, and 
smite it home to its native ooze again ! Your Lordship, this 
is too true, though irreverently spoken : indeed one knows 
not how to speak of it ; and to me it is infinitely sad and 
miserable, spoken or not ! Unless perhaps the Voluntary 
Principle will still help us through ? Perhaps this Irish leak, in 
such a rotten distressed condition of the Ship, with all the crew 
so anxious about it, will be kind enough to stop of itself ? 

Dismiss that hope, your Lordship ! Let all real and 
imaginary Governors of England, at the pass we have arrived 
at, dismiss forever that fallacious fatal solace to their do- 
nothingim : of itself, too clearly, the leak will never stop ; 
by human skill and energy it must be stopped, or there is 
nothing but the sea-bottom for us all ! A Chief Governor of 
England really ought to recognise his situation ; to discern 
that, doing nothing, and merely drifting to and fro, in 
however constitutional a manner, he is a squanderer of 
precious moments, moments that perhaps are priceless ; a 
truly alarming Chief Governor. Surely, to a Chief Governor 
of England, worthy of that high name, surely to him, as to 
every living man, in every conceivable situation short of the 
Kingdom of the Dead, there is something 1 possible ; some 
plan of action other than that of standing mildly, with 



38 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

crossed arms, till he and we sink ? Complex as his situation 
is, he, of all Governors now extant among these distracted 
Nations, has, as I compute, by far the greatest possibilities. 
The Captains, actual or potential, are there, and the million 
Captainless : and such resources for bringing them together 
as no other has. To these outcast soldiers of his, unregi- 
mented roving banditti for the present, or unworking work- 
house prisoners who are almost uglier than banditti ; to these 
floods of Irish Beggars, Able-bodied Paupers, and nomadic 
Lackalls, now stagnating or roaming everywhere, drowning 
the face of the world (too truly) into an untenantable swamp 
and Stygian quagmire, has the Chief Governor of this country 
no word whatever to say ? Nothing but " Rate in aid," " Time 
will mend it," " Necessary business of the Session" ; and " After 
me the Deluge " ? A Chief Governor that can front his Irish 
difficulty, and steadily contemplate the horoscope of Irish and 
British Pauperism, and whitherward it is leading him and us, 
in this humour, must be a What shall we call such a Chief 
Governor ? Alas, in spite of old use and wont, little other 
than a tolerated Solecism, growing daily more intolerable ! 
He decidedly ought to have some word to say on this matter, 
to be incessantly occupied in getting something which he 
could practically say ! Perhaps to the following, or a much 
finer effect ? 



Speech of the British Prime- Minister to the foods of Irish and 
other Beggars, the able-bodied Lackalls, nomadic or station- 
ary, and the general assembly, outdoor and indoor, of the 
Pauper Populations of these Realms 

" Vagrant Lackalls, foolish most of you, criminal many of 
you, miserable all ; the sight of you fills me with astonish- 
ment and despair. What to do with you I know not ; long 
have I been meditating, and it is hard to tell. Here are 
some three millions of you, as I count : so many of you fallen 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 39 

sheer over into the abysses of open Beggary ; and, fearful to 
think, every new unit that falls is loading so much more the 
chain that drags the others over. On the edge of the preci- 
pice hang uncounted millions ; increasing, I am told, at the 
rate of 1200 a-day. They hang there on the giddy edge, 
poor souls, cramping themselves down, holding-on with all 
their strength ; but falling, falling one after another ; and 
the chain is getting heavy, so that ever more fall ; and who 
at last will stand ? What to do with you ? The question, 
What to do with you ? especially since the potato died, is 
like to break my heart ! 

" One thing, after much meditating, I have at last dis- 
covered, and now know for some time back : That you 
cannot be left to roam abroad in this unguided manner, 
stumbling over the precipices, and loading ever heavier the 
fatal chain upon those who might be able to stand ; that 
this of locking you up in temporary Idle Workhouses, when 
you stumble, and subsisting you on Indian meal, till you can 
sally forth again on fresh roamings, and fresh stumblings, and 
ultimate descent to the devil ; that this is not the plan ; 
and that it never was, or could out of England have been 
supposed to be, much as I have prided myself upon it ! 

"Vagrant Lackalls, I at last perceive, all this that has 
been sung and spoken, for a long while, about enfranchise- 
ment, emancipation, freedom, suffrage, civil and religious 
liberty over the world, is little other than sad temporary 
jargon, brought upon us by a stern necessity, but now 
ordered by a sterner to take itself away again a little. Sad 
temporary jargon, I say : made-up of sense and nonsense, 
sense in small quantities, and nonsense in very large ; and, 
if taken for the whole or permanent truth of human things, 
it is no better than fatal infinite nonsense eternally untrue. 
All men, I think, will soon have to quit this, to consider 
this as a thing pretty well achieved ; and to look-out towards 
another thing much more needing achievement at the time 
that now is. 



40 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

" All men will have to quit it, I believe. But to you, my 
indigent friends, the time for quitting it has palpably arrived ! 
To talk of glorious self-government, of suffrages and hustings, 
and the fight of freedom and suchlike, is a vain thing in your 
case. By all human definitions and conceptions of the said 
fight of freedom, you for your part have lost it, and can fight 
no more. Glorious self-government is a glory not for you, 
not for Hodge's emancipated horses, nor you. No ; I say, 
No. You, for your part, have tried it, and Jailed. Left to 
walk your own road, the will-o'-wisps beguiled you, your 
short sight could not descry the pitfalls ; the deadly tumult 
and press has whirled you hither and thither, regardless of 
your struggles and your shrieks ; and here at last you lie ; 
fallen flat into the ditch, drowning there and dying, unless 
the others that are still standing please to pick you up. 
The others that still stand have their own difficulties, I can 
tell you ! But you, by imperfect energy and redundant 
appetite, by doing too little work and drinking too much 
beer, you (I bid you observe) have proved that you cannot do 
it ! You lie there plainly in the ditch. And I am to pick 
you up again, on these mad terms ; help you ever again, as 
with our best heartVblood, to do what, once for all, the 
gods have made impossible? To load the fatal chain with 
your perpetual staggerings and sprawlings ; and ever again 
load it, till we all lie sprawling ? My indigent, incompetent 
friends, I will not ! Know that, whoever may be ' sons of 
freedom,' you for your part are not and cannot be such. 
Not * free ' you, I think, whoever may be free. You palpably 
are fallen captive, caitiff, as they once named it : you do, 
silently, but eloquently, demand, in the name of mercy itself, 
that some genuine command be taken of you. 

" Yes, my indigent incompetent friends ; some genuine 
practical command. Such, if I rightly interpret those mad 
Chartisms, Repeal Agitations, Red Republics, and other 
delirious inarticulate bowlings and bellowings which all the 
populations of the world now utter, evidently cries of pain 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 41 

on their and your part, is the demand which you, Captives, 
make of all men that are not Captive, but are still Free. 
Free men, alas, had you ever any notion who the free men 
were, who the not-free, the incapable of freedom ! The free 
men, if you could have understood it, they are the wise men ; 
the patient, self-denying, valiant ; the Nobles of the World ; 
who can discern the Law of this Universe, what it is, and 
piously obey it; these, in late sad times, having cast you 
loose, you are fallen captive to greedy sons of profit-and-loss ; 
to bad and ever to worse ; and at length to Beer and the 
Devil. Algiers, Brazil or Dahomey hold nothing in them so 
authentically slave as you are, my indigent incompetent 
friends ! 

" Good Heavens, and I have to raise some eight or nine 
millions annually, six for England itself, and to wreck the 
morals of my working population beyond all money's worth, 
to keep the life from going out of you : a small service to 
you, as I many times bitterly repeat ! Alas, yes ; before 
high Heaven I must declare it such. I think the old 
Spartans, who would have killed you instead, had shown 
more ' humanity, 1 more of manhood, than I thus do ! More 
humanity, I say, more of manhood, and of sense for what the 
dignity of man demands imperatively of you and of me and 
of us all. We call it charity, beneficence, and other fine 
names, this brutish Workhouse Scheme of ours ; and it is 
but sluggish heartlessness, and insincerity, and cowardly 
lowness of soul. Not ' humanity ' or manhood, I think ; 
perhaps apehood rather, paltry imitancy, from the teeth 
outward, of what our heart never felt nor our understanding 
ever saw ; dim indolent adherence to extraneous hearsays and 
extinct traditions ; traditions now really about extinct ; not 
living now to almost any of us, and still haunting with their 
specialities and gibbering ghosts (in a truly baleful manner) 
almost all of us ! Making this our struggling * Twelfth 
Hour of the Night ' inexpressibly hideous ! 

" But as for you, my indigent incompetent friends, I have 



42 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

to repeat with sorrow, but with perfect clearness, what is 
plainly undeniable, and is even clamorous to get itself 
admitted, that you are of the nature of slaves, or if you 
prefer the word, of nomadic, and now even vagrant and vaga- 
bond, servants that can Jind no master on those terms ; which 
seems to me a much uglier word. Emancipation? You 
have been * emancipated ' with a vengeance ! Foolish souls, 
I say the whole world cannot emancipate you. Fealty to 
ignorant Unruliness, to gluttonous sluggish Improvidence, to 
the Beerpot and the Devil, who is there that can emancipate 
a man in that predicament ? Not a whole Reform Bill, a 
whole French Revolution executed for his behoof alone : 
nothing but God the Maker can emancipate him, by making 
him anew. 

" To forward which glorious consummation, will it not be 
well, O indigent friends, that you, fallen flat there, shall 
henceforth learn to take advice of others as to the methods 
of standing ? Plainly I let you know, and all the world and 
the worlds know, that I for my part mean it so. Not as 
glorious unfortunate sons of freedom, but as recognised 
captives, as unfortunate fallen brothers requiring that I 
should command you, and if need were, control and compel 
you, can there henceforth be a relation between us. Ask 
me not for Indian meal ; you shall be compelled to earn it 
first; know that on other terms I will not give you any. 
Before Heaven and Earth, and God the Maker of us all, 
I declare it is a scandal to see such a life kept in you, by 
the sweat and heartVblood of your brothers ; and that, if 
we cannot mend it, death were preferable ! Go to, we must 
get out of this unutterable coil of nonsenses, constitutional, 
philanthropical, etc., in which (surely without mutual hatred, 
if with less of ' love ' than is supposed) we are all strangling 
one another ! Your want of wants, I say, is that you be 
commanded in this world, not being able to command your- 
selves. Know therefore that it shall be so with you. 
Nomadism, I give you notice, has ended ; needful permanency, 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 43 

soldier-like obedience, and the opportunity and the necessity 
of hard steady labour for your living, have begun. Know 
that the Idle Workhouse is shut against you henceforth ; you 
cannot enter there at will, nor leave at will ; you shall enter 
a quite other Refuge, under conditions strict as soldiering, 
and not leave till I have done with you. He that prefers 
the glorious (or perhaps even the rebellious mglorious) c career 
of freedom,' let him prove that he can travel there, and be 
the master of himself; and right good speed to him. He 
who has proved that he cannot travel there or be the master 
of himself, let him, in the name of all the gods, become a 
servant, and accept the just rules of servitude ! 

" Arise, enlist in my Irish, my Scotch and English * Regi- 
ments of the New Era,' which I have been concocting, day 
and night, during these three Grouse-seasons (taking earnest 
incessant counsel, with all manner of Industrial Notabilities 
and men of insight, on the matter), and have now brought to 
a kind of preparation for incipiency, thank Heaven ! Enlist 
there, ye poor wandering banditti ; obey, work, suffer, abstain, 
as all of us have had to do : so shall you be useful in God's 
creation, so shall you be helped to gain a manful living for 
yourselves ; not otherwise than so. Industrial Regiments " 
[Here numerous persons, with big" wigs many of them, and 
austere aspect, whom I take to be Professors of the Dismal 
Science, start up in an agitated vehement manner : but the 
Premier resolutely beckons them down again] " Regiments 
not to fight the French or others, who are peaceable enough 
towards us ; but to fight the Bogs and Wildernesses at home 
and abroad, and to chain the Devils of the Pit which are 
walking too openly among us. 

" Work, for you ? Work, surely, is not quite undiscover- 
able in an Earth so wide as ours, if we will take the right 
methods for it ! Indigent friends, we will adopt this new 
relation (which is old as the world) ; this will lead us towards 
such. Rigorous conditions, not to be violated on either side, 
lie in this relation ; conditions planted there by God Himself ; 



44 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

which woe will betide us if we do not discover, gradually 
more and more discover, and conform to ! Industrial Colonels, 
Workmasters, Taskmasters, Life -commanders, equitable as 
Rhadamanthus and inflexible as he : such, I perceive, you do 
need ; and such, you being once put under law as soldiers are, 
will be discoverable for you. I perceive, with boundless 
alarm, that I shall have to set about discovering such, I, 
since I am at the top of affairs, with all men looking to me. 
Alas, it is my new task in this New Era ; and God knows, 
I too, little other than a red tape Talking -machine, and 
unhappy Bag of Parliamentary Eloquence hitherto, am far 
behind with it ! But street-barricades rise everywhere : the 
hour of Fate has come. In Connemara there has sprung 
a leak, since the potato died ; Connaught, if it were not for 
Treasury -grants and rates -in -aid, would have to recur to 
Cannibalism even now, and Human Society would cease to 
pretend that it existed there. Done this thing must be. 
Alas, I perceive that if I cannot do it, then surely I shall die, 
and perhaps shall not have Christian burial ! But I already 
raise near upon Ten Millions for feeding you in idleness, my 
nomadic friends ; work, under due regulations, I really might 
try to get of" [Here arises indescribable uproar, no longer 
repressible, from all manner of Economists, Emancipationists, 
Constitutionalists, and miscellaneous Professors of the Dismal 
Science, pretty numerously scattered about; and cries of " Private 
Enterprise? " Rights of Capital? "Voluntary Principle? "Doc- 
trines of the British Constitution? swollen by the general 
assenting hum of all the world, quite drown the Chief Minister 
for a while. He, with invincible resolution, persists ; obtains 
hearing again :] 

" Respectable Professors of the Dismal Science, soft you a 
little. Alas, I know what you would say. For my sins, I 
have read much in those inimitable volumes of yours, really 
I should think, some barrowfuls of them in my time, and, 
in these last forty years of theory and practice, have pretty 
well seized what of Divine Message you were sent with to me. 



I.] THE PRESENT TIME 45 

Perhaps as small a message, give me leave to say, as ever 
there was such a noise made about before. Trust me, I have 
not forgotten it, shall never forget it. Those Laws of the 
Shop-till are indisputable to me ; and practically useful in 
certain departments of the Universe, as the multiplication- 
table itself. Once I even tried to sail through the Immensities 
with them, and to front the big coming Eternities with 
them ; but I found it would not do. As the Supreme Rule 
of Statesmanship, or Government of Men, since this Uni- 
verse is not wholly a Shop, no. You rejoice in my improved 
tariffs, free-trade movements and the like, on every hand ; for 
which be thankful, and even sing litanies if you choose. But 
here at last, in the Idle- Workhouse movement, unexampled 
yet on Earth or in the waters under the Earth, I am fairly 
brought to a stand ; and have had to make reflections, of the 
most alarming, and indeed awful, and as it were religious 
nature ! Professors of the Dismal Science, I perceive that 
the length of your tether is now pretty well run ; and that I 
must request you to talk a little lower in future. By the 
side of the shop-till, see, your small * Law of God ' is hung 
up, along with the multiplication-table itself. But beyond 
and above the shop-till, allow me to say, you shall as good 
as hold your peace. Respectable Professors, I perceive it is 
not now the Gigantic Hucksters, but it is the Immortal Gods, 
yes, they, in their terror and their beauty, in their wrath and 
their beneficence, that are coming into play in the affairs of 
this world ! Soft you a little. Do not you interrupt me, 
but try to understand and help me ! 

" Work, was I saying ? My indigent unguided friends, 
I should think some work might be discoverable for you. 
Enlist, stand drill ; become, from a nomadic Banditti of 
Idleness, Soldiers of Industry ! I will lead you to the Irish 
Bogs, to the vacant desolations of Connaught now falling 
into Cannibalism, to mistilled Connaught, to ditto Munster, 
Leinster, Ulster, I will lead you : to the English fox-covers, 
furze-grown Commons, New Forests, Salisbury Plains : like- 



46 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

wise to the Scotch Hill-sides, and bare rushy slopes, which 
as yet feed only sheep, moist uplands, thousands of square 
miles in extent, which are destined yet to grow green crops, 
and fresh butter and milk and beef without limit (wherein no 
'Foreigner can compete with us 1 ), were the Glasgow sewers 
once opened on them, and you with your Colonels carried 
thither. In the Three Kingdoms, or in the Forty Colonies, 
depend upon it, you shall be led to your work ! 

" To each of you I will then say : Here is work for you ; 
strike into it with manlike, soldierlike obedience and hearti- 
ness, according to the methods here prescribed, wages follow 
for you without difficulty ; all manner of just remuneration, 
and at length emancipation itself follows. Refuse to strike 
into it ; shirk the heavy labour, disobey the rules, I will 
admonish and endeavour to incite you ; if in vain, I will flog 
you; if still in vain, I will at last shoot you, and make 
God's Earth, and the forlorn-hope in God's Battle, free of you. 
Understand it, I advise you ! The Organisation of Labour " 
[Left speaking, says our reporter.] 

' Left speaking ' : alas, that he should have to ' speak ' so 
much ! There are things that should be done, not spoken ; 
that till the doing of them is begun, cannot well be spoken. 
He may have to * speak ' seven years yet, before a spade 
be struck into the Bog of Allen ; and then perhaps it will 
be too late ! 

You perceive, my friends, we have actually got into the 
* New Era ' there has been such prophesying of : here we all 
are, arrived at last ; and it is by no means the land flowing 
with milk and honey we were led to expect ! Very much the 
reverse. A terrible new country this : no neighbours in it 
yet, that I can see, but irrational flabby monsters (philan- 
thropic and other) of the giant species; hyaenas, laughing 
hyaenas, predatory wolves ; probably devils, blue (or perhaps 
blue-and-yellow) devils, as St. Guthlac found in Croyland 
long ago. A huge untrodden haggard country, the * chaotic 



I.] 



THE PRESENT TIME 



47 



battle-field of Frost and Fire ' ; a country of savage glaciers, 
granite mountains, of foul jungles, unhewed forests, quaking 
bogs ; which we shall have our own ados to make arable and 
habitable, I think ! We must stick by it, however ; of all 
enterprises the impossiblest is that of getting out of it, and 
shifting into another. To work, then, one and all ; hands 
to work ! 



No. II 
MODEL PRISONS 

[1st MARCH 1850] 

THE deranged condition of our affairs is a universal topic 
among men at present ; and the heavy miseries pressing, in 
their rudest shape, on the great dumb inarticulate class, and 
from this, by a sure law, spreading upwards, in a less palpable 
but not less certain and perhaps still more fatal shape on all 
classes to the very highest, are admitted everywhere to be 
great, increasing and now almost unendurable. How to 
diminish them, this is every man's question. For in fact 
they do imperatively need diminution ; and unless they can be 
diminished, there are many other things that cannot very long 
continue to exist beside them. A serious question indeed, 
How to diminish them ! 

Among the articulate classes, as they may be called, there 
are two ways of proceeding in regard to this. One large body 
of the intelligent and influential, busied mainly in personal 
affairs, accepts the social iniquities, or whatever you may call 
them, and the miseries consequent thereupon ; accepts them, 
admits them to be extremely miserable, pronounces them 
entirely inevitable, incurable except by Heaven, and eats its 
pudding with as little thought of them as possible. Not a 
very noble class of citizens these ; not a very hopeful or 
salutary method of dealing with social iniquities this of theirs, 
however it may answer in respect to themselves and their 
personal affairs ! But now there is the select small minority 
in whom some sentiment of public spirit and human pity still 
survives, among whom, or not anywhere, the good Cause may 
expect to find soldiers and servants : their method of proceed- 



48 






NO. IL] MODEL PRISONS 49 

ing, in these times, is also very strange. They embark in the 
4 philanthropic movement ' ; they calculate that the miseries 
of the world can be cured by bringing the philanthropic 
movement to bear on them. To universal public misery, and 
universal neglect of the clearest public duties, let private 
charity superadd itself: there will thus be some balance 
restored, and maintained again ; thus, or by what conceiv- 
able method ? On these terms they, for their part, embark 
in the sacred cause ; resolute to cure a world's woes by rose- 
water ; desperately bent on trying to the uttermost that mild 
method. It seems not to have struck these good men that 
no world, or thing here below, ever fell into misery, without 
having first fallen into folly, into sin against the Supreme 
Ruler of it, by adopting as a law of conduct what was not a 
law, but the reverse of one ; and that, till its folly, till its sin 
be cast out of it, there is not the smallest hope of its misery 
going, that not for all the charity and rose-water in the 
world will its misery try to go till then ! 

This is a sad error ; all the sadder as it is the error chiefly 
of the more humane and noble-minded of our generation ; 
among whom, as we said, or elsewhere not at all, the cause ot 
real Reform must expect its servants. At present, and for a 
long while past, whatsoever young soul awoke in England with 
some disposition towards generosity and social heroism, or at 
lowest with some intimation of the beauty of such a disposi- 
tion, he, in whom the poor world might have looked for a 
Reformer, and valiant mender of its foul ways, was almost 
sure to become a Philanthropist, reforming merely by this 
rose-water method. To admit that the world's ways are 
foul, and not the ways of God the Maker, but of Satan the 
Destroyer, many of them, and that they must be mended or 
we all die ; that if huge misery prevails, huge cowardice, 
falsity, disloyalty, universal Injustice high and low, have still 
longer prevailed, and must straightway try to cease prevail- 
ing : this is what no visible reformer has yet thought of 
doing. All so-called ' reforms ' hitherto are grounded either 



50 LATTER- DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

on openly-admitted egoism (cheap bread to the cotton-spinner, 
voting to those that have no vote, and the like), which does 
not point towards very celestial developments of the Reform 
movement; or else upon this of remedying social injustices 
by indiscriminate contributions of philanthropy, a method 
surely still more unpromising. Such contributions, being in- 
discriminate, are but a new injustice ; these will never lead 
to reform, or abolition of injustice, whatever else they 
lead to ! 

Not by that method shall we ' get round Cape Horn,* by 
never such unanimity of voting, under the most approved 
Phantasm Captains ! It is miserable to see. Having, as it 
were, quite lost our way round Cape Horn, and being sorely 
* admonished ' by the Iceberg and other dumb councillors, the 
pilots, instead of taking to their sextants, and asking with 
a seriousness unknown for a long while, What the Laws of 
wind and water, and of Earth and of Heaven are, decide 
that now, in these new circumstances, they will, to the worthy 
and unworthy, serve-out a double allowance of grog. In this 
way they hope to do it, by steering on the old wrong tack, 
and serving-out more and more copiously what little aquavitce 
may be still on board ! Philanthropy, emancipation, and pity 
for human calamity is very beautiful ; but the deep oblivion 
of the Law of Right and Wrong ; this * indiscriminate mash- 
ing-up of Right and Wrong into a patent treacle ' of the 
Philanthropic movement, is by no means beautiful ; this, on 
the contrary, is altogether ugly and alarming. 

Truly if there be not something inarticulate among us, not 
yet uttered but pressing towards utterance, which is much 
wiser than anything we have lately articulated or brought 
into word or action, our outlooks are rather lamentable. The 
great majority of the powerful and active-minded, sunk in 
egoistic scepticisms, busied in chase of lucre, pleasure, and 
mere vulgar objects, looking with indifference on the world's 
woes, and passing carelessly by on the other side ; and the 
select minority, of whom better might have been expected, 



II. 1 MODEL PRISONS 51 

bending all their strength to cure them by methods which can 
only make bad worse, and in the end render cure hopeless. 
A blind loquacious pruriency of indiscriminate Philanthropism 
substituting itself, with much self-laudation, for the silent 
divinely awful sense of Right and Wrong; testifying too 
clearly that here is no longer a divine sense of Right and 
Wrong ; that, in the smoke of this universal, and alas inevit- 
able and indispensable revolutionary fire, and burning-up of 
worn-out rags of which the world is full, our life-atmosphere 
has (for the time) become one vile London fog, and the 
eternal loadstars are gone out for us ! Gone out ; yet very 
visible if you can get above the fog ; still there in their place, 
and quite the same as they always were ! To whoever does 
still know of loadstars, the proceedings, which expand them- 
selves daily, of these sublime philanthropic associations, and 
4 universal sluggard-and-scoundrel protection-societies,' are a 
perpetual affliction. With their emancipations and abolition- 
principles, and reigns of brotherhood and new methods of 
love, they have done great things in the White and in the 
Black World, during late years ; and are preparing for 
greater. 

In the interest of human reform, if there is ever to be 
any reform, and return to prosperity or to the possibility of 
prospering, it is urgent that the nonsense of all this (and it is 
mostly nonsense, but not quite) should be sent about its 
business straightway, and forbidden to deceive the well- 
meaning souls among us any more. Reform, if we will 
understand that divine word, cannot begin till then. One 
day, I do know, this, as is the doom of all nonsense, will be 
drummed-out of the world, with due placard stuck on its 
back, and the populace flinging dead cats at it : but whether 
soon or not, is by no means so certain. I rather guess, not 
at present, not quite soon. Fraternity, in other countries, 
has gone on, till it found itself unexpectedly manipulating 
guillotines by its chosen Robespierres, and become a fraternity 
like Cain's. Much to its amazement ! For in fact it is not 



52 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

all nonsense ; there is an infinitesimal fraction of sense in it 
withal ; which is so difficult to disengage ; which must be 
disengaged, and laid hold of, before Fraternity can vanish. 

But to our subject, the Model Prison, and the strange 
theory of life now in action there. That, for the present, is 
my share in the wide adventure of Philanthropism ; the world's 
share, and how and when it is to be liquidated and ended, 
rests with the Supreme Destinies. 

Several months ago, some friends took me with them to 
see one of the London Prisons ; a Prison of the exemplary or 
model kind. An immense circuit of buildings ; cut-out, girt 
with a high ring-wall, from the lanes and streets of the 
quarter, which is a dim and crowded one. Gateway as to a 
fortified place ; then a spacious court, like the square of a 
city ; broad staircases, passages to interior courts ; fronts of 
stately architecture all round. It lodges some Thousand or 
Twelve-hundred prisoners, besides the officers of the establish- 
ment. Surely one of the most perfect buildings, within the 
compass of London. We looked at the apartments, sleeping- 
cells, dining-rooms, working-rooms, general courts or special 
and private : excellent all, the ne-plus-ultra of human care and 
ingenuity ; in my life I never saw so clean a building ; 
probably no Duke in England lives in a mansion of such 
perfect and thorough cleanness. 

The bread, the cocoa, soup, meat, all the various sorts of 
food, in their respective cooking-places, we tasted : found 
them of excellence superlative. The prisoners sat at work, 
light work, picking oakum, and the like, in airy apartments 
with glass roofs, of agreeable temperature and perfect ventila- 
tion ; silent, or at least conversing only by secret signs : 
others were out, taking their hour of promenade in clean 
flagged courts : methodic composure, cleanliness, peace, sub- 
stantial wholesome comfort reigned everywhere supreme. 
The women in other apartments, some notable murderesses 
among them, all in the like state of methodic composure and 
substantial wholesome comfort, sat sewing : in long ranges of 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 53 

wash-houses, drying-houses and whatever pertains to the 
getting-up of clean linen, were certain others, with all con- 
ceivable mechanical furtherances, not too arduously working. 
The notable murderesses were, though with great precau- 
tions of privacy, pointed out to us ; and we were requested 
not to look openly at them, or seem to notice them at all, 
as it was found to ' cherish their vanity ' when visitors 
looked at them. Schools too were there ; intelligent teachers 
of both sexes, studiously instructing the still ignorant of 
these thieves. 

From an inner upper room or gallery, we looked down 
into a range of private courts, where certain Chartist Nota- 
bilities were undergoing their term. Chartist Notability First 
struck me very much : I had seen him about a year before, 
by involuntary accident and much to my disgust, magnetising 
a silly young person ; and had noted well the unlovely 
voracious look of him, his thick oily skin, his heavy dull- 
burning eyes, his greedy mouth, the dusky potent insatiable 
animalism that looked out of every feature of him : a fellow 
adequate to animal-magnetise most things, I did suppose ; 
and here was the post I now found him arrived at. Next 
neighbour to him was Notability Second, a philosophic or 
literary Chartist ; walking rapidly to and fro in his private 
court, a clean, high-walled place ; the world and its cares 
quite excluded, for some months to come : master of his own 
time and spiritual resources to, as I supposed, a really 
enviable extent. What * literary man ' to an equal extent ! 
I fancied I, for my own part, so left with paper and ink, and 
all taxes and botherations shut-out from me, could have 
written such a Book as no reader will here ever get of me. 
Never, O reader, never here in a mere house with taxes and 
botherations. Here, alas, one has to snatch one's poor Book, 
bit by bit, as from a conflagration ; and to think and live, 
comparatively, as if the house were not one's own, but mainly 
the world's and the devil's. Notability Second might have 
filled one with envy. 



54 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

The Captain of the place, a gentleman of ancient Military 
or Royal-Navy habits, was one of the most perfect governors ; 
professionally and by nature zealous for cleanliness, punctu- 
ality, good order of every kind ; a humane heart and yet a 
strong one ; soft of speech and manner, yet with an inflexible 
rigour of command, so far as his limits went : ' iron hand in 
a velvet glove,' as Napoleon defined it. A man of real worth, 
challenging at once love and respect : the light of those 
mild bright eyes seemed to permeate the place as with an 
all-pervading vigilance, and kindly yet victorious illumination ; 
in the soft definite voice it was as if Nature herself were 
promulgating her orders, gentlest mildest orders, which how- 
ever, in the end, there would be no disobeying, which in the 
end there would be no living without fulfilment of. A true 
' aristos, and commander of men. A man worthy to have 
commanded and guided forward, in good ways, Twelve- 
hundred of the best commonpeople in London or the world : 
he was here, for many years past, giving all his care and 
faculty to command, and guide forward in such ways as there 
were, Twelve-hundred of the worst. I looked with con- 
siderable admiration on this gentleman ; and with consider- 
able astonishment, the reverse of admiration, on the work he 
had here been set upon. 

This excellent Captain was too old a Commander to com- 
plain of anything; indeed he struggled visibly the other 
way, to find in his own mind that all here was best ; but I 
could sufficiently discern that, in his natural instincts, if not 
mounting up to the region of his thoughts, there was a con- 
tinual protest going on against much of it ; that nature and 
all his inarticulate persuasion (however much forbidden to 
articulate itself) taught him the futility and unfeasibility of 
the system followed here. The Visiting Magistrates, he 
gently regretted rather than complained, had lately taken his 
tread wheel from him, men were just now pulling it down ; and 
how he was henceforth to enforce discipline on these bad 
subjects, was much a difficulty with him. " They cared for 



IL] MODEL PRISONS 55 

nothing but the treadwheel, and for having their rations cut 
short " : of the two sole penalties, hard work and occasional 
hunger, there remained now only one, and that by no means 
the better one, as he thought. The * sympathy ' of visitors, 
too, their 'pity' for his interesting scoundrel -subjects, 
though he tried to like it, was evidently no joy to this 
practical mind. Pity, yes : but pity for the scoundrel- 
species ? For those who will not have pity on themselves, 
and will force the Universe and the Laws of Nature to have 
no * pity ' on them ? Meseems I could discover fitter objects 
of pity ! 

In fact it too was clear, this excellent man had got a field 
for his faculties which, in several respects, was by no means the 
suitable one. To drill Twelve-hundred scoundrels by ( the 
method of kindness,' and of abolishing your very treadwheel, 
how could any commander rejoice to have such a work 
cut-out for him ? You had but to look in the faces of these 
Twelve-hundred, and despair, for most part, of ever ' com- 
manding ' them at all. Miserable distorted blockheads, the 
generality ; ape-faces, imp-faces, angry dog-faces, heavy sullen 
ox-faces; degraded underfoot perverse creatures, sons of in- 
docility, greedy mutinous darkness, and in one word, of 
STUPIDITY, which is the general mother of such. Stupidity 
intellectual and stupidity moral (for the one always means 
the other, as you will, with surprise or not, discover if you 
look) had born this progeny : base-natured beings, on whom 
in the course of a maleficent subterranean life of London 
Scoundrelism, the Genius of Darkness (called Satan, Devil, 
and other names) had now visibly impressed his seal, and had 
marked them out as soldiers of Chaos and of him, appointed 
to serve in hw Regiments, First of the line, Second ditto, and 
so on in their order. Him, you could perceive, they would 
serve ; but not easily another than him. These were the 
subjects whom our brave Captain and Prison-Governor was 
appointed to command, and reclaim to other service, by * the 
method of love, 1 with a treadwheel abolished. 



56 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Hopeless forevermore such a project. These abject, ape, 
wolf, ox, imp and other diabolic-animal specimens of humanity, 
who of the very gods could ever have commanded them by 
love ? A collar round the neck, and a cartwhip flourished 
over the back ; these, in a just and steady human hand, were 
what the gods would have appointed them ; and now when, 
by long misconduct and neglect, they had sworn themselves 
into the Devil's regiments of the line, and got the seal of 
Chaos impressed on their visage, it was very doubtful whether 
even these would be of avail for the unfortunate commander 
of Twelve-hundred men ! By * love,' without hope except of 
peaceably teasing oakum, or fear except of a temporary loss 
of dinner, he was to guide these men, and wisely constrain 
them, whitherward ? No-whither : that was his goal, if 
you will think well of it ; that was a second fundamental 
falsity in his problem. False in the warp and false in the 
woof, thought one of us ; about as false a problem as any I 
have seen a good man set upon lately ! To guide scoundrels 
by * love ' ; that is a false woof, I take it, a method that will 
not hold together; hardly for the flower of men will love 
alone do ; and for the sediment and scoundrelism of men it 
has not even a chance to do. And then to guide any class 
of men, scoundrel or other, No-whither, which was this poor 
Captain's problem, in this Prison with oakum for its one 
element of hope or outlook, how can that prosper by * love ' 
or by any conceivable method ? That is a warp wholly false. 
Out of which false warp, or originally false condition to start 
from, combined and daily woven into by your false woof, or 
methods of * love ' and suchlike, there arises for our poor 
Captain the falsest of problems, and for a man of his faculty 
the unfairest of situations. His problem was, not to com- 
mand good men to do something, but bad men to do (with 
superficial disguises) nothing. 

On the whole, what a beautiful Establishment here fitted- 
up for the accommodation of the scoundrel-world, male and 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 57 

female ! As I said, no Duke in England is, for all rational 
purposes which a human being can or ought to aim at, lodged, 
fed, tended, taken care of, with such perfection. Of poor 
craftsmen that pay rates and taxes from their day's wages, of 
the dim millions that toil and moil continually under the sun, 
we know what is the lodging and the tending. Of the John- 
sons, Goldsmiths, lodged in their squalid garrets; working 
often enough amid famine, darkness, tumult, dust and deso- 
lation, what work they have to do : of these as of * spiritual 
backwoodsmen,' understood to be preappointed to such a life, 
and like the pigs to killing, * quite used to it,' I say nothing. 
But of Dukes, which Duke, I could ask, has cocoa, soup, 
meat, and food in general made ready, so fit for keeping him 
in health, in ability to do and to enjoy ? Which Duke has a 
house so thoroughly clean, pure and airy ; lives in an element 
so wholesome, and perfectly adapted to the uses of soul and 
body as this same, which is provided here for the Devil's 
regiments of the line ? No Duke that I have ever known. 
Dukes are waited-on by deleterious French cooks, by per- 
functory grooms of the chambers, and expensive crowds of 
eye-servants, more imaginary than real : while here, Science, 
Human Intellect and Beneficence have searched and sat 
studious, eager to do their very best ; they have chosen a real 
Artist in Governing to see their best, in all details of it, 
done. Happy regiments of the line, what soldier to any 
earthly or celestial Power has such a lodging and attendance 
as you here? No soldier or servant direct or indirect of 
God or of man, in this England at present. Joy to you, 
regiments of the line. Your Master, I am told, has his Elect, 
and professes to be ' Prince of the Kingdoms of this World ' ; 
and truly I see he has power to do a good turn to those he 
loves, in England at least. Shall we say, May he, may the 
Devil give you good of it, ye Elect of Scoundrelism ? I will 
rather pass by, uttering no prayer at all ; musing rather in 
silence on the singular ' worship of God,' or practical 
' reverence done to Human Worth ' (which is the outcome 



58 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

and essence of all real * worship ' whatsoever) among the 
posterity of Adam at this day. 

For all round this beautiful Establishment, or Oasis of 
Purity, intended for the Devil's regiments of the line, lay 
continents of dingy poor and dirty dwellings, where the 
unfortunate not yet enlisted into that Force were struggling 
manifoldly, in their workshops, in their marble-yards and 
timber-yards and tan-yards, in their close cellars, cobbler- 
stalls, hungry garrets, and poor dark trade-shops with red- 
herrings and tobacco-pipes crossed in the window, to keep 
the Devil out-of-doors, and not enlist with him. And it 
was by a tax on these that the Barracks for the regiments of 
the line were kept up. Visiting Magistrates, impelled by 
Exeter Hall, by Able-Editors, and the Philanthropic Move- 
ment of the Age, had given orders to that effect. Rates on 
the poor servant of God and of her Majesty, who still serves 
both in his way, painfully selling red-herrings ; rates on him 
and his red-herrings to boil right soup for the Devil's declared 
Elect ! Never in my travels, in any age or clime, had I 
fallen-in with such Visiting Magistrates before. Reserved 
they, I should suppose, for these ultimate or penultimate 
ages of the world, rich in all prodigies, political, spiritual, 
ages surely with such a length of ears as was never 
paralleled before. 

If I had a commonwealth to reform or to govern, certainly 
it should not be the Devil's regiments of the line that I 
would first of all concentrate my attention on ! With them 
I should be apt to make rather brief work ; to them one 
would apply the besom, try to sweep them with some rapidity 
into the dust-bin, and well out of one's road, I should rather 
say. Fill your thrashing-floor with docks, ragweeds, mug- 
worths, and ply your flail upon them, that is not the 
method to obtain sacks of wheat. Away, you ; begone 
swiftly, ye regiments of the line : in the name of G-od and 
of His poor struggling servants, sore put to it to live in these 
bad days, I mean to rid myself of you with some degree of 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 59 

brevity. To feed you in palaces, to hire captains and school- 
masters and the choicest spiritual and material artificers to 
expend their industries on you, No, by the Eternal 1 I 
have quite other work for that class of artists ; Seven-and- 
twenty Millions of neglected mortals who have not yet quite 
declared for the Devil. Mark it, my diabolic friends, I mean 
to lay leather on the backs of you, collars round the necks of 
you ; and will teach you, after the example of the gods, that 
this world is not your inheritance, or glad to see you in it. 
You, ye diabolic canaille, what has a Governor much to do 
with you ? You, I think, he will rather swiftly dismiss from 
his thoughts, which have the whole celestial and terrestrial 
for their scope, and not the subterranean of scoundreldom 
alone. You, I consider, he will sweep pretty rapidly into 
some Norfolk Island, into some special Convict Colony or 
remote domestic Moorland, into some stone-walled Silent- 
System, under hard drill-sergeants, just as Rhadamanthus, 
and inflexible as he, and there leave you to reap what you 
have sown ; he meanwhile turning his endeavours to the 
thousandfold immeasurable interests of men and gods, 
dismissing the one extremely contemptible interest of 
scoundrels ; sweeping that into the cesspool, tumbling that 
over London Bridge, in a very brief manner, if needful ! 
Who are you, ye thriftless sweepings of Creation, that we 
should forever be pestered with you ? Have we no work to 
do but drilling Devil's regiments of the line ? 

If I had schoolmasters, my benevolent friend, do you 
imagine I would set them on teaching a set of unteachables, 
who as you perceive have already made up their mind that 
black is white, that the Devil namely is the advantageous 
Master to serve in this world ? My esteemed Benefactor of 
Humanity, it shall be far from me. Minds open to that 
particular conviction are not the material I like to work 
upon. When once my schoolmasters have gone over all the 
other classes of society from top to bottom ; and have no 
other soul to try with teaching, all being thoroughly taught, 



60 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

I will then send them to operate on these regiments of the 
line : then, and, assure yourself, never till then. The truth 
is, I am sick of scoundreldom, my esteemed Benefactor; it 
always was detestable to me ; and here where I find it lodged 
in palaces and waited on by the benevolent of the world, it 
is more detestable, not to say insufferable to me than ever. 

Of Beneficence, Benevolence, and the people that come 
together to talk on platforms and subscribe five pounds, 
I will say nothing here ; indeed there is not room here for 
the twentieth part of what were to be said of them. The 
beneficence, benevolence, and sublime virtue which issues in 
eloquent talk reported in the Newspapers, with the subscrip- 
tion of five pounds, and the feeling that one is a good 
citizen and ornament to society, concerning this, there were 
a great many unexpected remarks to be made ; but let this 
one, for the present occasion, suffice : 

My sublime benevolent friends, don't you perceive, for one 
thing, that here is a shockingly unfruitful investment for 
your capital of Benevolence; precisely the worst, indeed, 
which human ingenuity could select for you ? " Laws are 
unjust, temptations great,"" etc. etc. : alas, I know it, and 
mourn for it, and passionately call on all men to help in 
altering it. But according to every hypothesis as to the law, 
and the temptations and pressures towards vice, here are the 
individuals who, of all the society, have yielded to said 
pressure. These are of the worst substance for enduring 
pressure ! The others yet stand and make resistance to 
temptation, to the law's injustice ; under all the perversities 
and strangling impediments there are, the rest of the society 
still keep their feet, and struggle forward, marching under 
the banner of Cosmos, of God and Human Virtue; these 
select Few, as I explain to you, are they who have fallen to 
Chaos, and are sworn into certain regiments of the line. A 
superior proclivity to Chaos is declared in these, by the very 
fact of their being here ! Of all the generation we live in, 
these are the worst stuff'. These, I say, are the Elixir of the 



IL] MODEL PRISONS 61 

Infatuated among living mortals: if you want the -worst 
investment for your Benevolence, here you accurately have it. 
O my surprising friends ! Nowhere so as here can you be 
certain that a given quantity of wise teaching bestowed, 
of benevolent trouble taken, will yield zero, or the net 
minimum of return. It is sowing of your wheat upon Irish 
quagmires ; laboriously harrowing it in upon the sand of the 
sea-shore. O my astonishing benevolent friends ! 

Yonder, in those dingy habitations, and shops of red- 
herring and tobacco-pipes, where men have not yet quite 
declared for the Devil ; there, I say, is land : here is mere 
sea-beach. Thither go with your benevolence, thither to 
those dingy caverns of the poor ; and there instruct and drill 
and manage, there where some fruit may come from it. 
And, above all and inclusive of all, cannot you go to those 
Solemn human Shams, Phantasm Captains, and Supreme 
Quacks that ride prosperously in every thoroughfare ; and 
with severe benevolence, ask them, What they are doing here ? 
They are the men whom it would behove you to drill a little, 
and tie to the halberts in a benevolent manner, if you could ! 
"We cannot," say you? Yes, my friends, to a certain 
extent you can. By many well-known active methods, and 
by all manner of passive methods, you can. Strive thither- 
ward, I advise you ; thither, with whatever social effort there 
may lie in you ! The well-head and * consecrated ' thrice- 
accursed chief fountain of all those waters of bitterness, 
it is they, those Solemn Shams and Supreme Quacks of yours, 
little as they or you imagine it ! Them, with severe bene- 
volence, put a stop to ; them send to their Father, far from 
the sight of the true and just, if you would ever see a 
just world here ! 

What sort of reformers and workers are you, that work 
only on the rotten material ? That never think of meddling 
with the material while it continues sound ; that stress it and 
strain it with new rates and assessments, till once it has 
given way and declared itself rotten ; whereupon you snatch 



62 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

greedily at it, and say, Now let us try to do some good upon 
it ! You mistake in every way, my friends : the fact is, you 
fancy yourselves men of virtue, benevolence, what not ; and 
you are not even men of sincerity and honest sense. I grieve 
to say it ; but it is true. Good from you, and your opera- 
tions, is not to be expected. You may go down ! 



Howard is a beautiful Philanthropist, eulogised by Burke, 
and in most men's minds a sort of beatified individual. How 
glorious, having finished-off one's affairs in Bedfordshire, or in 
fact finding them very dull, inane, and worthy of being quitted 
and got away from, to set out on a cruise over the Jails first 
of Britain ; then, finding that answer, over the Jails of the 
habitable Globe ! * A voyage of discovery, a circumnavigation 
of charity; to collate distresses, to gauge wretchedness, to 
take the dimensions of human misery ' : really it is very fine. 
Captain Cook's voyage for the Terra Australis, Ross's, Frank- 
lin's for the ditto Borealis : men make various cruises and 
voyages in this world, for want of money, want of work, and 
one or the other want, which are attended with their diffi- 
culties too, and do not make the cruiser a demigod. On the 
whole, I have myself nothing but respect, comparatively 
speaking, for the dull solid Howard, and his * benevolence,' 
and other impulses that set him cruising ; Heaven had grown 
weary of Jail-fevers, and other the like wjyust penalties 
inflicted upon scoundrels, for scoundrels too, and even the 
very Devil, should not have more than their due ; and 
Heaven, in its opulence, created a man to make an end of 
that. Created him ; disgusted him with the grocer business ; 
tried him with Calvinism, rural ennui, and sore bereavement 
in his Bedfordshire retreat ; and, in short, at last got him 
set to his work, and in a condition to achieve it. For which 
I am thankful to Heaven ; and do also, with doffed hat, 
humbly salute John Howard. A practical solid man. if a 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 63 

dull and even dreary ; * carries his weighing-scales in his 
pocket ' : when your jailor answers, " The prisoner's allowance 
of food is so and so ; and we observe it sacredly ; here, for 
example, is a ration." " Hey ! a ration this ? " and solid 
John suddenly produces his weighing-scales ; weighs it, marks 
down in his tablets what the actual quantity of it is. That 
is the art and manner of the man. A man full of English 
accuracy ; English veracity, solidity, simplicity ; by whom this 
universal Jail-commission, not to be paid for in money but 
far otherwise, is set about, with all the slow energy, the 
patience, practicality, sedulity and sagacity common to the 
best English commissioners paid in money and not expressly 
otherwise. 

For it is the glory of England that she has a turn for 
fidelity in practical work ; that sham- workers, though very 
numerous, are rarer than elsewhere ; that a man who under- 
takes work for you will still, in various provinces of our 
affairs, do it, instead of merely seeming to do it. John 
Howard, without pay in money, did this of the Jail-fever, as 
other Englishmen do work, in a truly workmanlike manner : 
his distinction was that he did it without money. He had 
not 500Z. or 5,OOOZ. a-year of salary for it ; but lived merely 
on his Bedfordshire estates, and as Snigsby irreverently ex- 
presses it, * by chewing his own cud.' And, sure enough, if 
any man might chew the cud of placid reflections, solid 
Howard, a mournful man otherwise, might at intervals indulge 
a little in that luxury. No money-salary had he for his 
work ; he had merely the income of his properties, and what 
he could derive from within. Is this such a sublime dis- 
tinction, then? Well, let it pass at its value. There have 
been benefactors of mankind who had more need of money 
than he, and got none too. Milton, it is known, did his 
Paradise Lost at the easy rate of five pounds. Kepler worked 
out the secret of the Heavenly Motions in a dreadfully 
painful manner ; * going over the calculations sixty times ' ; 
and having not only no public money, but no private either ; 



64 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

and, in fact, writing almanacs for his bread-and- water, while 
he did this of the Heavenly Motions ; having no Bedfordshire 
estates ; nothing but a pension of 181. (which they would not 
pay him), the valuable faculty of writing almanacs, and at 
length the invaluable one of dying, when the Heavenly bodies 
were vanquished, and battle's conflagration had collapsed into 
cold dark ashes, and the starvation reached too high a pitch 
for the poor man. 

Howard is not the only benefactor that has worked without 
money for us ; there have been some more, and will be, I 
hope ! For the Destinies are opulent ; and send here and 
there a man into the world to do work, for which they do not 
mean to pay him in money. And they smite him beneficently 
with sore afflictions, and blight his world all into grim frozen 
ruins round him, and can make a wandering Exile of their 
Dante, and not a soft-bedded Podesta of Florence, if they wish 
to get a Divine Comedy out of him. Nay, that rather is 
their way, when they have worthy work for such a man ; they 
scourge him manifoldly to the due pitch, sometimes nearly 
of despair, that he may search desperately for his work, and 
find it ; they urge him on still with beneficent stripes when 
needful, as is constantly the case between whiles ; and, in 
fact, have privately decided to reward him with beneficent 
death by and by, and not with money at all. O my 
benevolent friend, I honour Howard very much ; but it is 
on this side idolatry a long way, not to an infinite, but to 
a decidedly finite extent ! And you, put not the modest 
noble Howard, a truly modest man, to the blush, by forcing 
these reflections on us ! 

Cholera Doctors, hired to dive into black dens of infection 
and despair, they, rushing about all day from lane to lane, 
with their life in their hand, are found to do their function ; 
which is a much more rugged one than Howard's. Or what 
say we, Cholera Doctors? Ragged losels gathered by beat 
of drum from the overcrowded streets of cities, and drilled 
a little and dressed in red, do not they stand fire in an 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 65 

uncensurable manner; and handsomely give their life, if 
needful, at the rate of a shilling per day ? Human virtue, 
if we went down to the roots of it, is not so rare. The 
materials of human virtue are everywhere abundant as the 
light of the sun : raw materials, O woe, and loss, and 
scandal thrice and threefold, that they so seldom are elaborated, 
and built into a result ! that they lie yet unelaborated, and 
stagnant in the souls of wide-spread dreary millions, ferment- 
ing, festering ; and issue at last as energetic vice instead of 
strong practical virtue ! A Mrs. Manning * dying game,' 
alas, is not that the foiled potentiality of a kind of heroine 
too ? Not a heroic Judith, not a mother of the Gracchi 
now, but a hideous murderess, fit to be the mother of hyaenas ! 
To such extent can potentialities be foiled. Education, 
kingship, command, where is it, whither has it fled ? Woe 
a thousand times, that this, which is the task of all kings, 
captains, priests, public speakers, land-owners, book-writers, 
mill-owners, and persons possessing or pretending to possess 
authority among mankind, is left neglected among them 
all ; and instead of it so little done but protocolling, black- 
er- white surplicing, partridge - shooting, parliamentary elo- 
quence and popular twaddle-literature ; with such results as 
we see ! 

Howard abated the Jail-fever ; but it seems to me he has 
been the innocent cause of a far more distressing fever which 
rages high just now ; what we may call the Benevolent- 
Platform Fever. Howard is to be regarded as the unlucky 
fountain of that tumultuous frothy ocean-tide of benevolent 
sentimentality, * abolition of punishment,' all - absorbing 
' prison-discipline,' and general morbid sympathy, instead of 
hearty hatred, for scoundrels ; which is threatening to drown 
human society as in deluges, and leave, instead of an * edifice 
of society ' fit for the habitation of men, a continent of fetid 
ooze inhabitable only by mud -gods and creatures that walk 
upon their belly. Few things more distress a thinking soul 
at this time. 



66 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Most sick am I, O friends, of this sugary disastrous jargon 
of philanthropy, the reign of love, new era of universal 
brotherhood, and not Paradise to the Well-deserving but 
Paradise to All-and-sundry, which possesses the benighted 
minds of men and women in our day. My friends, I think 
you are much mistaken about Paradise ! ' No Paradise for 
anybody : he that cannot do without Paradise, go his ways ' : 
suppose you tried that for a while ! I reckon that the safer 
version. Unhappy sugary brethren, this is all untrue, this 
other ; contrary to the fact ; not a tatter of it will hang 
together in the wind and weather of fact. In brotherhood 
with the base and foolish I, for one, do not mean to live. 
Not in brotherhood with them was life hitherto worth much 
to me ; in pity, in hope not yet quite swallowed of disgust, 
otherwise in enmity that must last through eternity, in 
unappeasable aversion shall I have to live with these ! 
Brotherhood ? No, be the thought far from me. They are 
Adam's children, alas yes, I well remember that, and never 
shall forget it ; hence this rage and sorrow. But they have 
gone over to the dragons; they have quitted the Father's 
house, and set-up with the Old Serpent : till they return, 
how can they be brothers? They are enemies, deadly to 
themselves and to me and to you, till then ; till then, while 
hope yet lasts, I will treat them as brothers fallen insane ; 
when hope has ended, with tears grown sacred and wrath 
grown sacred, I will cut them off in the name of God ! It 
is at my peril if I do not. With the servant of Satan I dare 
not continue in partnership. Him I must put away, reso- 
lutely and forever ; * lest,' as it is written, * I become partaker 
of his plagues.' 

Beautiful Black Peasantry, who have fallen idle and have 
got the Devil at your elbow ; interesting White Felonry, who 
are not idle, but have enlisted into the Devil's regiments of 
the line, know that my benevolence for you is compara- 
tively trifling ! What I have of that divine feeling is due 
to others, not to you. A * universal Sluggard-and-Scoundrel 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 67 

Protection Society' is not the one I mean to institute in 
these times, where so much wants protection, and is sinking 
to sad issues for want of it ! The scoundrel needs no pro- 
tection. The scoundrel that will hasten to the gallows, why 
not rather clear the way for him ! Better he reach his goal 
and outgate by the natural proclivity, than be so expensively 
dammed-up and detained, poisoning everything as he stagnates 
and meanders along, to arrive at last a hundred times fouler, 
and swollen a hundred times bigger ! Benevolent men should 
reflect on this. And you Quashee, my pumpkin, (not a bad 
fellow either, this poor Quashee, when tolerably guided !) 
idle Quashee, I say you must get the Devil sent away from 
your elbow, my poor dark friend ! In this world there will 
be no existence for you otherwise. No, not as the brother of 
your folly will I live beside you. Please to withdraw out of 
my way, if I am not to contradict your folly, and amend it, 
and put it in the stocks if it will not amend. By the Eternal 
Maker, it is on that footing alone that you and I can live 
together ! And if you had respectable traditions dated from 
beyond Magna Charta, or from beyond the Deluge, to the 
contrary, and written sheepskins that would thatch the face 
of the world, behold I, for one individual, do not believe 
said respectable traditions, nor regard said written sheepskins 
except as things which you, till you grow wiser, will believe. 
Adieu, Quashee ; I will wish you better guidance than you 
have had of late. 

On the whole, what a reflection it is that we cannot bestow 
on an unworthy man any particle of our benevolence, our 
patronage, or whatever resource is ours, without withdraw- 
ing it, it and all that will grow of it, from one worthy, to 
whom it of right belongs ! We cannot, I say ; impossible ; 
it is the eternal law of things. Incompetent Duncan 
M'Pastehorn, the hapless incompetent mortal to whom I 
give the cobbling of my boots, and cannot find in my heart 
to refuse it, the poor drunken wretch having a wife and ten 
children ; he withdraws the job from sober, plainly competent, 



68 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

and meritorous Mr. Sparrowbill, generally short of work too ; 
discourages Sparrowbill ; teaches him that he too may as well 
drink and loiter and bungle ; that this is not a scene for 
merit and demerit at all, but for dupery, and whining flattery, 
and incompetent cobbling of every description ; clearly tend- 
ing to the ruin of poor Sparrowbill ! What harm had 
Sparrowbill done me that I should so help to ruin him ? 
And I couldn't save the unsalvable M'Pastehorn ; I merely 
yielded him, for insufficient work, here and there a half- 
crown, which he oftenest drank. And now Sparrowbill also 
is drinking ! 

Justice, Justice : woe betides us everywhere when, for this 
reason or for that, we fail to do justice ! No beneficence, 
benevolence, or other virtuous contribution will make good the 
want. And in what a rate of terrible geometrical progres- 
sion, far beyond our poor computation, any act of Injustice 
once done by us grows ; rooting itself ever anew, spreading 
ever anew, like a banyan-tree, blasting all life under it, for 
it is a poison-tree ! There is but one thing needed for the 
world ; but that one is indispensable. Justice, Justice, in the 
name of Heaven ; give us Justice, and we live ; give us only 
counterfeits of it, or succedanea for it, and we die ! 

O this universal syllabub of philanthropic twaddle ! My 
friend, it is very sad, now when Christianity is as good as 
extinct in all hearts, to meet this ghastly Phantasm of Chris- 
tianity parading through almost all. " I will clean your foul 
thoroughfares, and make your Devil's-cloaca of a world into a 
garden of Heaven," jabbers this Phantasm, itself a phos- 
phorescence and unclean ! The worst, it is written, comes 
from corruption of the best : Semitic forms now lying putres- 
cent, dead and still unburied, this phosphorescence rises. I 
say sometimes, such a blockhead Idol, and miserable White 
Mumbojumbo, fashioned out of deciduous sticks and cast 
clothes, out of extinct cants and modern sentimentalisms, as 
that which they sing litanies to at Exeter Hall and extensively 



IL] MODEL PRISONS 69 

elsewhere, was perhaps never set-up by human folly before. 
Unhappy creatures, that is not the Maker of the Universe, 
not that, look one moment at the Universe, and see ! That 
is a paltry Phantasm, engendered in your own sick brain ; 
whoever follows that as a Reality will fall into the ditch. 

Reform, reform, all men see and feel, is imperatively 
needed. Reform must either be got, and speedily, or else we 
die : and nearly all the men that speak, instruct us, saying, 
" Have you quite done your interesting Negroes in the Sugar 
Islands ? Rush to the Jails, then, O ye reformers ; snatch- 
up the interesting scoundrel-population there, to them be 
nursing-fathers and nursing-mothers. And O wash, and dress, 
and teach, and recover to the service of Heaven, these poor 
lost souls ; so, we assure you, will society attain the needful 
reform, and life be still possible in this world." Thus sing 
the oracles everywhere; nearly all the men that speak, 
though we doubt not, there are, as usual, immense majorities 
consciously or unconsciously wiser who hold their tongue. 
But except this of whitewashing the scoundrel-population, 
one sees little ' reform ' going on. There is perhaps some en- 
deavour to do a little scavengering ; and, as the all-including 
point, to cheapen the terrible cost of Government : but neither 
of these enterprises makes progress owing to impediments. 

" Whitewash your scoundrel-population ; sweep-out your 
abominable gutters (if not in the name of God, ye brutish 
slatterns, then in the name of Cholera and the Royal College 
of Surgeons) : do these two things ; and observe, much 
cheaper if you please ! " Well, here surely is an Evangel of 
Freedom, and real Program of a new Era. What surliest 
misanthrope would not find this world lovely, were these 
things done ; scoundrels whitewashed ; some degree of scaven- 
gering upon the gutters ; and at a cheap rate, thirdly ? 
That surely is an occasion on which, if ever on any, the 
Genius of Reform may pipe all hands ! Poor old Genius of 
Reform ; bedrid this good while ; with little but broken 
ballot-boxes, and tattered stripes of Benthamee Constitutions 



70 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

lying round him ; and on the walls mere shadows of clothing- 
colonels, rates-in-aid, poor-law unions, defunct potato and the 
Irish difficulty, he does not seem long for this world, piping 
to that effect ? 



Not the least disgusting feature of this Gospel according 
to the Platform is its reference to religion, and even to the 
Christian Religion, as an authority and mandate for what 
it does. Christian Religion ? Does the Christian or any 
religion prescribe love of scoundrels then? I hope it pre- 
scribes a healthy hatred of scoundrels ; otherwise what am I, 
in Heaven's name, to make of it? Me, for one, it will not 
serve as a religion on those strange terms. Just hatred of 
scoundrels, I say ; fixed, irreconcilable, inexorable enmity to 
the enemies of God : this, and not love for them, and 
incessant whitewashing, and dressing and cockering of them, 
must, if you look into it, be the backbone of any human 
religion whatsoever. Christian Religion ! In what words can 
I address you, ye unfortunates, sunk in the slushy ooze till 
the worship of mud-serpents, and unutterable Pythons and 
poisonous slimy monstrosities, seems to you the worship of 
God ? This is the rotten carcass of Christianity ; this mal- 
odorous phosphorescence of post-mortem sentimentalism. O 
Heavens, from the Christianity of Oliver Cromwell, wrestling 
in grim fight with Satan and his incarnate Blackguardisms, 
Hypocrisies, Injustices, and legion of human and infernal 
angels, to that of eloquent Mr. Hesperus Fiddlestring 
denouncing capital punishments, and inculcating the benevol- 
ences on platforms, what a road have we travelled ! 

A foolish stump-orator, perorating on his platform mere 
benevolences, seems a pleasant object to many persons ; a 
harmless or insignificant one to almost all. Look at him, 
however ; scan him till you discern the nature of him, he is 
not pleasant, but ugly and perilous. That beautiful speech of 
his takes captive every long ear, and kindles into quasi-sacred 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 71 

enthusiasm the minds of not a few ; but it is quite in the 
teeth of the everlasting facts of this Universe, and will come 
only to mischief for every party concerned. Consider that 
little spouting wretch. Within the paltry skin of him, it is 
too probable, he holds few human virtues, beyond those essen- 
tial for digesting victual : envious, cowardly, vain, splenetic 
hungry soul ; what heroism, in word or thought or action, 
will you ever get from the like of him ? He, in his necessity, 
has taken into the benevolent line ; warms the cold vacuity 
of his inner man to some extent, in a comfortable manner, 
not by silently doing some virtue of his own, but by fiercely 
recommending hearsay pseudo- virtues and respectable bene- 
volences to other people. Do you call that a good trade ? 
Long-eared fellow-creatures, more or less resembling himself, 
answer, " Hear, hear ! Live Fiddlestring forever ! " Where- 
from follow Abolition Congresses, Odes to the Gallows ; 
perhaps some dirty little Bill, getting itself debated next 
Session in Parliament, to waste certain nights of our legis- 
lative Year, and cause skipping in our Morning Newspaper, 
till the abortion can be emptied out again and sent fairly 
floating down the gutters. 

Not with entire approbation do I, for one, look on that 
eloquent individual. Wise benevolence, if it had authority, 
would order that individual, I believe, to find some other 
trade : " Eloquent individual, pleading here against the Laws 
of Nature, for many reasons, I bid thee close that mouth of 
thine. Enough of balderdash these long-eared have now 
drunk. Depart thou ; do some benevolent work ; at lowest, 
be silent. Disappear, I say ; away, and jargon no more in 
that manner, lest a worst thing befal thee." Exeat Fiddle- 
string ! Beneficent men are not they who appear on plat- 
forms, pleading against the Almighty Maker's Laws ; these 
are the maleficent men, whose lips it is pity that some 
authority cannot straightway shut. Pandora's Box is not 
more baleful than the gifts these eloquent benefactors are 
pressing on us. Close your pedlar's-pack, my friend ; swift, 



72 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

away with it ! Pernicious, fraught with mere woe and sugary 
poison is that kind of benevolence and beneficence. 

Truly, one of the saddest sights in these times is that of 
poor creatures, on platforms, in parliaments and other situa- 
tions, making and unmaking ' Laws ' ; in whose soul, full of 
mere vacant hearsay and windy babble, is and was no image 
of Heaven's Law ; whom it never struck that Heaven had a 
Law, or that the Earth could not have what kind of Law 
you pleased ! Human Statute-books, accordingly, are growing 
horrible to think of. An impiety and poisonous futility 
every Law of them that is so made ; all Nature is against it ; 
it will and can do nothing but mischief wheresoever it shows 
itself in Nature : and such Laws lie now like an incubus over 
this Earth, so innumerable are they. How long, O Lord, 
how long ! O ye Eternities, Divine Silences, do you dwell 
no more, then, in the hearts of the noble and the true ; and 
is there no inspiration of the Almighty any more vouchsafed 
us ? The inspiration of the Morning Newspapers alas, we 
have had enough of that, and are arrived at the gates of 
death by means of that ! 

" Really, one of the most difficult questions this we have 
in these times, What to do with our criminals ?" blandly 
observed a certain Law-dignitary, in my hearing once, taking 
the cigar from his mouth, and pensively smiling over a group 
of us under the summer beech-tree, as Favonius carried off 
the tobacco-smoke ; and the group said nothing, only smiled 
and nodded, answering by new tobacco-clouds. " What to 
do with our criminals ? " asked the official Law-dignitary 
again, as if entirely at a loss. " I suppose," said one ancient 
figure not engaged in smoking, " the plan would be to treat 
them according to the real law of the case ; to make the 
Law of England, in respect of them, correspond to the Law 
of the Universe. Criminals, I suppose, would prove manage- 
able in that way : if we could do approximately as God 
Almighty does towards them ; in a word, if we could try to 






II.] MODEL PRISONS 73 

do Justice towards them." " 111 thank you for a definition 
of Justice ? " sneered the official person in a cheerily scornful 
and triumphant manner, backed by a slight laugh from the 
honourable company; which irritated the other speaker. 
" Well, I have no pocket-definition of Justice," said he, " to 
give your Lordship. It has not quite been my trade to look 
for such a definition ; I could rather fancy it had been your 
Lordship's trade, sitting on your high place this long while. 
But one thing I can tell you : Justice always , whether we 
define it or not. Everything done, suffered or proposed, in 
Parliament or out of it, is either just or else unjust ; either 
is accepted by the gods and eternal facts, or is rejected by 
them. Your Lordship and I, with or without definition, do 
a little know Justice, I will hope; if we don't both know 
it and do it, we are hourly travelling down towards 
Heavens, must I name such a place ! That is the place we 
are bound to, with all our trading-pack, and the small or 
extensive budgets of human business laid on us ; and there, 
if we don't know Justice, we, and all our budgets and Acts of 
Parliament, shall find lodging when the day is done ! " The 
official person, a polite man otherwise, grinned as he best 
could some semblance of a laugh, mirthful as that of the ass 
eating thistles, and ended in " Hah, oh, ah ! " 

Indeed, it is wonderful to hear what account we at present 
give ourselves of the punishment of criminals. No ' revenge ' 
O Heavens, no ; all preachers on Sunday strictly forbid 
that ; and even (at least on Sundays) prescribe the contrary 
of that. It is for the sake of * example, 1 that you punish ; 
to ' protect society "" and its purse and skin ; to deter the 
innocent from falling into crime ; and especially withal, for 
the purpose of improving the poor criminal himself, or at 
lowest, of hanging and ending him, that he may not grow 
worse. For the poor criminal is to be * improved' if 
possible : against him no * revenge * even on weekdays ; 
nothing but love for him, and pity and help ; poor fellow, 
is he not miserable enough ? Very miserable, though much 



74 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

less so than the Master of him, called Satan, is understood 
(on Sundays) to have long deservedly been ! 

My friends, will you permit me to say that all this, to one 
poor judgment among your number, is the mournfulest twaddle 
that human tongues could shake from them ; that it has no 
solid foundation in the nature of things ; and to a healthy 
human heart no credibility whatever? Permit me to say, 
only to hearts long drowned in dead Tradition, and for them- 
selves neither believing nor disbelieving, could this seem 
credible. Think, and ask yourselves, in spite of all this 
preaching and perorating from the teeth outward ! Hearts 
that are quite strangers to eternal Fact, and acquainted only 
at all hours with temporary Semblances parading about in a 
prosperous and persuasive condition ; hearts that from their 
first appearance in this world have breathed since birth, in all 
spiritual matters, which means in all matters not pecuniary, 
the poisonous atmosphere of universal Cant, could believe 
such a thing. Cant moral, Cant religious, Cant political ; 
an atmosphere which envelops all things for us unfortunates, 
and has long done ; which goes beyond the Zenith and below 
the Nadir for us, and has as good as choked the spiritual life 
out of all of us, God pity such wretches, with little or 
nothing real about them but their purse and their abdominal 
department ! Hearts, alas, which everywhere except in the 
raetallurgic and cottonspinning provinces, have communed 
with no Reality, or awful Presence of a Fact, godlike or 
diabolic, in this Universe or this unfathomable Life at all. 
Hunger-stricken asphyxied hearts, which have nourished 
themselves on what they call religions, Christian religions. 
Good Heaven, once more fancy the Christian religion of 
Oliver Cromwell ; or of some noble Christian man, whom you 
yourself may have been blessed enough, once, long since, in 
your life, to know ! These are not untrue religions ; they 
are the putrescences and foul residues of religions that are 
extinct, that have plainly to every honest nostril been dead 
some time, and the remains of which O ye eternal Heavens, 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 75 

will the nostril never be delivered from them ! Such hearts, 
when they get upon platforms, and into questions not 
involving money, can * believe ' many things ! 

I take the liberty of asserting that there is one valid reason, 
and only one, for either punishing a man or rewarding him 
in this world ; one reason, which ancient piety could well 
define : That you may do the will and commandment of God 
with regard to him ; that you may do justice to him. This 
is your one true aim in respect of him ; aim thitherward, 
with all your heart and all your strength and all your soul ; 
thitherward, and not elsewhither at all ! This aim is true, 
and will carry you to all earthly heights and benefits, and 
beyond the stars and Heavens. All other aims are purblind, 
illegitimate, untrue; and will never carry you beyond the 
shop-counter, nay, very soon will prove themselves incapable 
of maintaining you even there. Find out what the Law of 
God is with regard to a man ; make that your human law, 
or I say it will be ill with you, and not well ! If you love 
your thief or murderer, if Nature and eternal Fact love him, 
then do as you are now doing. But if Nature and Fact 
do not love him ? If they have set inexorable penalties upon 
him, and planted natural wrath against him in every god- 
created human heart, then I advise you, cease, and change 
your hand. 

Reward and punishment? Alas, alas, I must say you 
reward and punish pretty much alike ! Your dignities, 
peerages, promotions, your kingships, your brazen statues 
erected in capital and county towns to our select demigods 
of your selecting, testify loudly enough what kind of heroes 
and hero-worshippers you are. Woe to the People that no 
longer venerates, as the emblem of God himself, the aspect 
of Human Worth ; that no longer knows what human worth 
and unworth is ! Sure as the Decrees of the Eternal, that 
People cannot come to good. By a course too clear, by a 
necessity too evident, that People will come into the hands 
of the unworthy; and either turn on its bad career, or 



76 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

stagger downwards to ruin and abolition. Does the Hebrew 
People prophetically sing " Oil* clo"* ! " in all thoroughfares, 
these eighteen hundred years in vain ? 

To reward men according to their worth : alas, the perfec 
tion of this, we know, amounts to the millennium ! Neither 
is perfect punishment, according to the like rule, to be 
attained, nor even, by a legislator of these chaotic days, to 
be too zealously attempted. But when he does attempt it, 
yes, when he summons out the Society to sit deliberative 
on this matter, and consult the oracles upon it, and solemnly 
settle it in the name of God ; then, if never before, he should 
try to be a little in the right in settling it ! In regard to 
reward of merit, I do not bethink me of any attempt what- 
ever, worth calling an attempt, on the part of modern 
Governments ; which surely is an immense oversight on their 
part, and will one day be seen to have been an altogether 
fatal one. But as to the punishment of crime, happily this 
cannot be quite neglected. When men have a purse and a 
skin, they seek salvation at least for these ; and the Four 
Pleas of the Crown are a thing that must and will be attended 
to. By punishment, capital or other, by treadmilling and 
blind rigour, or by whitewashing and blind laxity, the 
extremely disagreeable offences of theft and murder must be 
kept down within limits. 

And so you take criminal caitiffs, murderers, and the like, 
and hang them on gibbets * for an example to deter others. 1 
Whereupon arise friends of humanity, and object. With very 
great reason, as I consider, if your hypothesis be correct. 
What right have you to hang any poor creature * for an 
example ' ? He can turn round upon you and say, " Why 
make * an example "" of me, a merely ill-situated, pitiable 
man ? Have you no more respect for misfortune ? Mis- 
fortune, I have been told, is sacred. And yet you hang me, 
now I am fallen into your hands ; choke the life out of me, 
for an example ! Again I ask, Why make an example of 
me, for your own convenience alone ? " All * revenge ' being 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 77 

out of the question, it seems to me the caitiff is unanswer- 
able ; and he and the philanthropic platforms have the logic 
all on their side. 

The one answer to him is : " Caitiff, we hate thee ; and 
discern for some six thousand years now, that we are called 
upon by the whole Universe to do it. Not with a diabolic 
but with a divine hatred. God himself, we have always 
understood, ' hates sin, 1 with a most authentic, celestial, and 
eternal hatred. A hatred, a hostility inexorable, unappeas- 
able, which blasts the scoundrel, and all scoundrels ultimately, 
into black annihilation and disappearance from the sum of 
things. The path of it as the path of a flaming sword : he 
that has eyes may see it, walking inexorable, divinely beauti- 
ful and divinely terrible, through the chaotic gulf of Human 
History, and everywhere burning, as with unquenchable 
fire, the false and death-worthy from the true and life- 
worthy ; making all Human History, and the Biography of 
every man, a God's Cosmos in place of a Devil's Chaos. So 
is it, in the end ; even so, to every man who is a man, and 
not a mutinous beast, and has eyes to see. To thee, caitiff, 
these things were and are, quite incredible ; to us they are 
too awfully certain, the Eternal Law of this Universe, 
whether thou and others will believe it or disbelieve. We, 
not to be partakers in thy destructive adventure of defying 
God and all the Universe, dare not allow thee to continue 
longer among us. As a palpable deserter from the ranks 
where all men, at their eternal peril, are bound to be : 
palpable deserter, taken with the red hand fighting thus 
against the whole Universe and its Laws, we send thee back 
into the whole Universe, solemnly expel thee from our com- 
munity ; and will, in the name of God, not with joy and 
exultation, but with sorrow stern as thy own, hang thee on 
Wednesday next, and so end. 1 " 

Other ground on which to deliberately slay a disarmed 
fellow-man I can see none. Example, effects upon the public 
mind, effects upon this and upon that : all this is mere 






78 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

appendage and accident ; of all this I make no attempt to 
keep account, sensible that no arithmetic will or can keep 
account of it ; that its ' effects,' on this hand and on that, 
transcend all calculation. One thing, if I can calculate it, 
will include all, and produce beneficial effects beyond calcu- 
lation, and no ill effect at all, anywhere or at any time : What 
the Law of the Universe, or Law of God, is with regard to 
this caitiff? That, by all sacred research and consideration, I 
will try to find out ; to that I will come as near as human 
means admit ; that shall be my exemplar and ' example ' ; all 
men shall through me see that, and be profited beyond cal- 
culation by seeing it. 

What this Law of the Universe, or Law made by God, is ? 
Men at one time read it in their Bible. In many Bibles, 
Books, and authentic symbols and monitions of Nature and 
the Word (of Fact, that is, and of Human Speech, or Wise 
Interpretation of Fact), there are still clear indications 
towards it. Most important it is, for this and for some 
other reasons, that men do, in some way, get to see it a little ! 
And if no man could now see it by any Bible, there is written 
in the heart of every man an authentic copy of it direct from 
Heaven itself : there, if he have learnt to decipher Heaven's 
writing, and can read the sacred oracles (a sad case for him 
if he altogether cannot), every born man may still find some 
copy of it. 

* Revenge,' my friends ! revenge, and the natural hatred of 
scoundrels, and the ineradicable tendency to revancher oneself 
upon them, and pay them what they have merited : this is 
forevermore intrinsically a correct, and even a divine feeling 
in the mind of every man. Only the excess of it is diabolic ; 
the essence I say is manlike, and even godlike, a monition 
sent to poor man by the Maker himself. Thou, poor reader, 
in spite of all this melancholy twaddle, and blotting-out of 
Heaven's sunlight by mountains of horsehair and officiality, 
hast still a human heart. If, in returning to thy poor peace- 
able dwelling-place, after an honest hard day's work, thou 






II.] MODEL PRISONS 79 

wert to find, for example, a brutal scoundrel who for lucre or 
other object of his, had slaughtered the life that was dearest 
to thee ; thy true wife, for example, thy true old mother, 
swimming in her blood ; the human scoundrel, or two-legged 
wolf, standing over such a tragedy : I hope a man would have 
so much divine rage in his heart as to snatch the nearest 
weapon, and put a conclusion upon said human wolf, for 
one ! A palpable messenger of Satan, that one ; accredited 
by all the Devils, to be put an end to by all the children of 
God. The soul of every god-created man flames wholly 
into one divine blaze of sacred wrath at sight of such a 
Devil's messenger; authentic first-hand monition from the 
Eternal Maker himself as to what is next to be done. Do 
it, or be thyself an ally of Devil's - messengers ; a sheep for 
two-legged human wolves, well deserving to be eaten, as thou 
soon wilt be ! 

My humane friends, I perceive this same sacred glow of 
divine wrath, or authentic monition at first hand from God 
himself, to be the foundation for all Criminal Law, and 
Official horsehair-and-bombazeen procedure against Scoundrels 
in this world. This first-hand gospel from the Eternities, 
imparted to every mortal, this is still, and will forever be, 
your sanction and commission for the punishment of human 
scoundrels. See well how you will translate this message 
from Heaven and the Eternities into a form suitable to this 
World and its Times. Let not violence, haste, blind im- 
petuous impulse, preside in executing it ; the injured man, 
invincibly liable to fall into these, shall not himself execute 
it : the whole world, in person of a Minister appointed for 
that end, and surrounded with the due solemnities and 
caveats, with bailiffs, apparitors, advocates, and the hushed 
expectation of all men, shall do it, as under the eye of God 
who made all men. How it shall be done ? this is ever a vast 
question, involving immense considerations. Thus Edmund 
Burke saw, in the Two Houses of Parliament, with King, 
Constitution, and all manner of Civil-Lists, and Chancellors' 1 



80 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

wigs and Exchequer budgets, only the * method of getting 
twelve just men put into a jury-box ' : that, in Burke's 
view, was the summary of what they were all meant for. 
How the judge will do it ? Yes, indeed : but let him see 
well that he does do it ; for it is a thing that must by no 
means be left undone ! A sacred gospel from the Highest : 
not to be smothered under horsehair and bombazeen, or 
drowned in platform froth, or in anywise omitted or neglected, 
without the most alarming penalties to all concerned ! 

Neglect to treat the hero as hero, the penalties, which 
are inevitable too, and terrible to think of, as your Hebrew 
friends can tell you, may be some time in coming; they 
will only gradually come. Not all at once will your Thirty- 
thousand Needlewomen, your Three-million Paupers, your 
Connaught fallen into potential Cannibalism, and other fine 
consequences of the practice, come to light; though come 
to light they will ; and " Ou* clo 1 ! " itself may be in store 
for you, if you persist steadily enough. But neglect to treat 
even your declared scoundrel as scoundrel, this is the last 
consummation of the process, the drop by which the cup runs 
over; the penalties of this, most alarming, extensive, and 
such as you little dream of, will straightway very rapidly 
come. Dim oblivion of Right and Wrong, among the 
masses of your population, will come; doubts as to Right 
and Wrong, indistinct notion that Right and Wrong are not 
eternal, but accidental, and settled by uncertain votings and 
talk ings, will come. Prurient influenza of Platform Benevo- 
lence, and * Paradise to All-and-sundry, 1 will come. In the 
general putrescence of your * religions,' as you call them, a 
strange new religion, named of Universal Love, with Sacra- 
ments mainly of Divorce, with Balzac, Sue and Company for 
Evangelists, and Madame Sand for Virgin, will come, and 
results fast following therefrom which will astonish you very 
much ! 

* The terrible anarchies of these years,' says Crabbe, in his 
Radiator, 'are brought upon us by a necessity too visible. 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 81 

By the crime of Kings, alas, yes ; but by that of Peoples 
too. Not by the crime of one class, but by the fatal obscura- 
tion, and all but obliteration of the sense of Right and 
Wrong in the minds and practices of every class. What a 
scene in the drama of Universal History, this of ours ! A 
world- wide loud bellow and bray of universal Misery ; lowing, 
with crushed maddened heart, its inarticulate prayer to 
Heaven : very pardonable to me, and in some of its tran- 
scendent developments, as in the grand French Revolution, 
most respectable and ever-memorable. For Injustice reigns 
everywhere ; and this murderous struggle for what they call 
" Fraternity, 11 and so forth, has a spice of eternal sense in it, 
though so terribly disfigured ! Amalgam of sense and non- 
sense ; eternal sense by the grain, and temporary nonsense by 
the square mile : as is the habit with poor sons of men. 
Which pardonable amalgam, however, if it be taken as the 
pure final sense, I must warn you and all creatures, is un- 
pardonable, criminal, and fatal nonsense ; with which I, for 
one, will take care not to concern myself ! 

'Dogs should not be taught to eat leather, says the old 
adage : no ; and where, by general fault and error, and the 
inevitable nemesis of things, the universal kennel is set to 
diet upon leather ; and from its keepers, its " Liberal Pre- 
miers, 11 or whatever their title is, will accept or expect nothing 
else, and calls it by the pleasant name of progress, reform, 
emancipation, abolition-principles, and the like, I consider 
the fate of said kennel and of said keepers to be a thing 
settled. Red republic in Phrygian nightcap, organisation of 
labour a la Louis Blanc ; street-barricades, and then murderous 
cannon-volleys a la Cavaignac and Windischgratz, follow out 
of one another, as grapes, must, new wine, and sour all- 
splitting vinegar do : vinegar is but vm-aigre, or the self- 
same " wine " grown sharp ( If, moreover, I find the Worship 
of Human Nobleness abolished in any country, and a new 
astonishing Phallus - Worship, with universal Balzac - Sand 
melodies and litanies in treble and in bass, established in 

F 



82 LATTER- DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

its stead, what can I compute but that Nature, in horrible 
throes, will repugn against such substitution, that, in short, 
the astonishing new Phallus- Worship, with its finer sensi- 
bilities of the heart, and "great satisfying loves," with its 
sacred kiss of peace for scoundrel and hero alike, with its all- 
embracing Brotherhood, and universal Sacrament of Divorce, 
will have to take itself away again ! ' 



The Ancient Germans, it appears, had no scruple about 
public executions ; on the contrary, they thought the just 
gods themselves might fitly preside over these ; that these 
were a solemn and highest act of worship, if justly done. 
When a German man had done a crime deserving death, they, 
in solemn general assembly of the tribe, doomed him, and 
considered that Fate and all Nature had from the beginning 
doomed him, to die with ignominy. Certain crimes there 
were of a supreme nature ; him that had perpetrated one of 
these, they believed to have declared himself a prince of 
scoundrels. Him once convicted they laid hold of, nothing 
doubting ; bore him, after judgment, to the deepest con- 
venient Peatbog ; plunged him in there, drove an oaken frame 
down over him, solemnly in the name of gods and men : 
"There, prince of scoundrels, that is what we have had to 
think of thee, on clear acquaintance ; our grim good-night to 
thee is that ! In the name of all the gods, lie there, and be 
our partnership with thee dissolved henceforth. It will be 
better for us, we imagine ! " 

My friends, after all this beautiful whitewash and humanity 
and prison-discipline ; and such blubbering and whimpering, 
and soft Litany to divine and also to quite other sorts of 
Pity, as we have had for a century now, give me leave to 
admonish, you that that of the Ancient Germans too was a 
thing inexpressibly necessary to keep in mind. If that is not 
kept in mind, the universal Litany to Pity is a mere universal 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 83 

nuisance, and torpid blasphemy against the gods. I do not 
much respect it, that purblind blubbering and litanying, as it 
is seen at present ; and the litanying over scoundrels I go the 
length of disrespecting, and in some cases even of detesting. 
Yes, my friends, scoundrel is scoundrel : that remains for ever 
a fact ; and there exists not in the earth whitewash that can 
make the scoundrel a friend of this Universe ; he remains an 
enemy if you spent your life in whitewashing him. He won't 
whitewash ; this one won't. The one method clearly is, That, 
after fair trial, you dissolve partnership with him ; send him, 
in the name of Heaven, whither Tie is striving all this while, 
and have done with him. And, in a time like this, I would 
advise you, see likewise that you be speedy about it ! For 
there is immense work, and of a far hopefuler sort, to be 
done elsewhere. 

Alas, alas, to see once the 'prince of scoundrels,' the 
Supreme Scoundrel, him whom of all men the gods liked 
worst, solemnly laid hold of, and hung upon the gallows in 
sight of the people ; what a lesson to all the people ! 
Sermons might be preached ; the Son of Thunder and the 
Mouth of Gold might turn their periods now with some 
hope ; for here, in the most impressive way, is a divine sermon 
acted. Didactic as no spoken sermon could be. Didactic, 
devotional too ; in awed solemnity, a recognition that 
Eternal Justice rules the world ; that at the call of this 
human pity shall fall silent, and man be stern as his Master 
and Mandatory is ! Understand too that except upon a 
basis of even such rigour, sorrowful, silent, inexorable as that 
of Destiny and Doom, there is no true pity possible. The 
pity that proves so possible and plentiful without that basis, 
is mere ignavia and cowardly effeminacy ; maudlin laxity of 
heart, grounded on blinkard dimness of head contemptible 
as a drunkard's tears. 

To see our Supreme Scoundrel hung upon the gallows, 
alas, that is far from us just now ! There is a worst man 



84 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

in England, too, curious to think of, whom it would be 
inexpressibly advantageous to lay hold of, and hang, the first 
of all. But we do not know him with the least certainty, 
the least approach even to a guess, such buzzards and 
dullards and poor children of the Dusk are we, in spite of our 
Statistics, Unshackled Presses, and Torches of Knowledge ; 
not eagles soaring sunward, not brothers of the lightnings 
and the radiances we; a dim horn -eyed, owl -population, 
intent mainly on the catching of mice ! Alas, the supreme 
scoundrel, alike with the supreme hero, is very far from being 
known. Nor have we the smallest apparatus for dealing with 
either of them, if he were known. Our supreme scoundrel 
sits, I conjecture, well-cushioned, in high places, at this time ; 
rolls softly through the world, and lives a prosperous gentle- 
man ; instead of sinking him in peat-bogs, we mount the 
brazen image of him on high columns : such is the world's 
temporary judgment about its supreme scoundrels ; a mad 
world, my masters. To get the supreme scoundrel always 
accurately the first hanged, this, which presupposes that 
the supreme hero were always the first promoted, this were 
precisely the millennium itself, clear evidence that the millen- 
nium had come : alas, we must forbear hope of this. Much 
water will run-by before we see this. 

And yet to quit all aim towards it ; to go blindly flounder- 
ing along, wrapt-up in clouds of horsehair, bombazeen, and 
sheepskin officiality, oblivious that there exists such an aim : 
this is indeed fatal. In every human law there must either 
exist such an aim, or else the law is not a human but a 
diabolic one. Diabolic, I say : no quantity of bombazeen, 
or lawyers 1 wigs, three-readings, and solemn trumpeting and 
bow-wowing in high places or in low, can hide from me its 
frightful infernal tendency ; bound, and sinking at all 
moments gradually to Gehenna, this * law ' ; and dragging 
down much with it ! * To decree injustice by a law ' : 
inspired Prophets have long since seen, what every clear soul 
may still see, that of all Anarchies and Devil-worships there 



II.] MODEL PRISONS 85 

is none like this ; that this is the * Throne of Iniquity ' set 
up in the name of the Highest, the human Apotheosis of 
Anarchy itself. " Quiet Anarchy," you exultingly say ? Yes ; 
quiet Anarchy, which the longer it sits * quiet ' will have the 
frightfuler account to settle at last. For every doit of the 
account, as I often say, will have to be settled one day, as 
sure as God lives. Principal, and compound interest rigorously 
computed ; and the interest is at a terrible rate per cent, in 
these cases ! Alas, the aspect of certain beatified Anarchies, 
sitting * quiet ' ; and of others in a state of infernal explosion 
for sixty years back : this, the one view our Europe offers at 
present, makes these days very sad. 

My unfortunate philanthropic friends, it is this long- 
continued oblivion of the soul of law that has reduced the 
Criminal Question to such a pass among us. Many other 
things have come, and are coming, for the same sad reason, 
to a pass ! Not the supreme scoundrel have our laws aimed 
at ; but, in an uncertain fitful manner, at the inferior or 
lowest scoundrel, who robs shop-tills and puts the skin of 
mankind in danger. How can Parliament get through the 
Criminal Question ? Parliament, oblivious of Heavenly Law, 
will find itself in hopeless reductio ad dbsurdum in regard to 
innumerable other questions, in regard to all questions 
whatsoever by and by. There will be no existence possible 
for Parliament on these current terms. Parliament, in its 
law-makings, must really try to attain some vision again of 
what Heaven's Laws are. A thing not easy to do ; a thing 
requiring sad sincerity of heart, reverence, pious earnestness, 
valiant manful wisdom ; qualities not overabundant in Par- 
liament just now, nor out of it, I fear. 

Adieu, my friends. My anger against you is gone ; my 
sad reflections on you, and on the depths to which you and I 
and all of us are sunk in these strange times, are not to be 
uttered at present. You would have saved the Sarawak 
Pirates, then ? The Almighty Maker is wroth that the 
Sarawak cutthroats, with their poisoned spears, are away ? 



86 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. IL 

What must his wrath be that the Thirty-thousand Needle- 
women are still here, and the question of ' prevenient grace ' 
not yet settled ! O my friends, in sad earnest, sad and deadly 
earnest, there much needs that God would mend all this, and 
that we should help him to mend it ! And don't you think, 
for one thing, ' Farmer Hodge's horses 1 in the Sugar Islands are 
pretty well * emancipated ' now ? My clear opinion farther is, 
we had better quit the Scoundrel-province of Reform ; better 
close that under hatches, in some rapid summary manner, and 
go elsewhither with our Reform efforts. A whole world, for 
want of Reform, is drowning and sinking; threatening to 
swamp itself into a Stygian quagmire, uninhabitable by any 
noble-minded man. Let us to the well-heads, I say ; to the 
chief fountains of these waters of bitterness ; and there strike 
home and dig ! To puddle in the embouchures and drowned 
outskirts, and ulterior and ultimate issues and cloacas of the 
affair : what profit can there be in that ? Nothing to be 
saved there ; nothing to be fished-up there, except with 
endless peril and spread of pestilence, a miscellany of broken 
waifs and dead dogs ! In the name of Heaven, quit that ! 



NO. in 

DOWNING STREET 

[IST APRIL 1850] 

FROM all corners of the wide British Dominion there rises 
one complaint against the ineffectuality of what are nicknamed 
our ' redtape ' establishments, our Government Offices, Colonial 
Office, Foreign Office and the others, in Downing Street and 
the neighbourhood. To me individually these branches of 
human business are little known ; but every British citizen 
and reflective passer-by has occasion to wonder much, and 
inquire earnestly, concerning them. To all men it is evident 
that the social interests of One-hundred and fifty Millions of 
us depend on the mysterious industry there carried on ; and 
likewise that the dissatisfaction with it is great, universal, and 
continually increasing in intensity, in fact, mounting, we 
might say, to the pitch of settled despair. 

Every colony, every agent for a matter colonial, has his 
tragic tale to tell you of his sad experiences in the Colonial 
Office; what blind obstructions, fatal indolences, pedantries, 
stupidities, on the right and on the left, he had to do battle 
with ; what a world- wide jungle of redtape, inhabited by 
doleful creatures, deaf or nearly so to human reason or 
entreaty, he had entered on ; and how he paused in amaze- 
ment, almost in despair ; passionately appealed now to this 
doleful creature, now to that, and to the dead redtape jungle, 
and to the living Universe itself, and to the Voices and to the 
Silences ; and, on the whole, found that it was an adventure, 
in sorrowful fact, equal to the fabulous ones by old knights- 
errant against dragons and wizards in enchanted wildernesses 
and waste howling solitudes ; not achievable except by nearly 

87 



88 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

superhuman exercise of all the four cardinal virtues, and 
unexpected favour of the special blessing of Heaven. His 
adventure achieved or found unachievable, he has returned 
with experiences new to him in the affairs of men. What 
this Colonial Office, inhabiting the head of Downing Street, 
really was, and had to do, or try doing, in God's practical 
Earth, he could not by any means precisely get to know ; 
believes that it does not itself in the least precisely know. 
Believes that nobody knows ; that it is a mystery, a kind of 
Heathen myth ; and stranger than any piece of the old 
mythological Pantheon ; for it practically presides over the 
destinies of many millions of living men. 

Such is his report of the Colonial Office : and if we oftener 
hear such a report of that than we do of the Home Office, 
Foreign Office or the rest, the reason probably is, that 
Colonies excite more attention at present than any of our 
other interests. The Forty Colonies, it appears, are all pretty 
like rebelling just now ; and are to be pacified with constitu- 
tions ; luckier constitutions, let us hope, than some late ones 
have been. Loyal Canada, for instance, had to quench a 
rebellion the other year ; and this year, in virtue of its con- 
stitution, it is called upon to pay the rebels their damages ; 
which surely is a rather surprising result, however constitu- 
tional ! Men have rents and moneys dependent in the 
Colonies ; Emigration schemes, Black Emancipations, New- 
Zealand and other schemes ; and feel and publish more 
emphatically what their Downing-Street woes in these respects 
have been. 

Were the state of poor sallow English ploughers and 
weavers, what we may call the Sallow or Yellow Emancipa- 
tion interest, as much an object with Exeter-Hall Philan- 
thropists as that of the Black blockheads now all emancipated, 
and going at large without work, or need of working, in 
West-India clover (and fattening very much in it, one delights 
to hear), then perhaps the Home Office, its huge virtual 
task better understood, and its small actual performance 



in.] DOWNING STREET 89 

better seen into, might be found still more deficient, and 
behind the wants of the age, than the Colonial itself is. 

How it stands with the Foreign Office, again, one still less 
knows. Seizures of Sapienza, and the like sudden appearances 
of Britain in the character of Hercules-Harlequin, waving, 
with big bully-voice, her huge sword-of-sharpness over field- 
mice, and in the air making horrid circles (horrid catharine- 
wheels and death-disks of metallic terror from said huge sword), 
to see how they will like it, do from time to time astonish 
the world, in a not pleasant manner. Hercules-Harlequin, 
the Attorney Triumphant, the World's Busybody : none of 
these are parts this Nation has a turn for ; she, if you con- 
sulted her, would rather not play these parts, but another ! 
Seizures of Sapienza, correspondences with Sotomayor, remon- 
strances to Otho King of Athens, fleets hanging by their 
anchor in behalf of the Majesty of Portugal ; and in short 
the whole, or at present very nearly the whole, of that 
industry of protocolling, diplomatising, remonstrating, ad- 
monishing, and * having the honour to be," has sunk justly 
in public estimation to a very low figure. 

For in fact, it is reasonably asked, What vital interest has 
England in any cause now deciding itself in foreign parts ? 
Once there was a Papistry and Protestantism, important as 
life eternal and death eternal ; more lately there was an 
interest of Civil Order and Horrors of the French Revolution, 
important at least as rent-roll and preservation of the game ; 
but now what is there ? No cause in which any god or man 
of this British Nation can be thought to be concerned. 
Sham-kingship, now recognised and even self-recognised every- 
where to be sham, wrestles and struggles with mere ballot- 
box Anarchy : not a pleasant spectacle to British minds. 
Both parties in the wrestle professing earnest wishes of peace 
to us, what have we to do with it except answer ear- 
nestly, " Peace, yes certainly, 1 ' and mind our affairs elsewhere. 
The British Nation has no concern with that indispensable 
sorrowful and shameful wrestle now going on everywhere in 



90 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

foreign parts. The British Nation already, by self-experience 
centuries old, understands all that ; was lucky enough to 
transact the greater part of that, in noble ancient ages, while 
the wrestle had not yet become a shameful one, but on both 
sides of it there was wisdom, virtue, heroic nobleness fruitful 
to all time, thrice-lucky British Nation ! The British 
Nation, I say, has nothing to learn there ; has now quite 
another set of lessons to learn, far ahead of what is going on 
there. Sad example there, of what the issue is, and how 
inevitable and how imminent, might admonish the British 
Nation to be speedy with its new lessons ; to bestir itself, as 
men in peril of conflagration do, with the neighbouring 
houses all on fire ! To obtain, for its own very pressing 
behoof, if by possibility it could, some real Captaincy instead 
of an imaginary one : to remove resolutely, and replace by a 
better sort, its own peculiar species of teaching and guiding 
histrios of various name, who here too are numerous exceed- 
ingly, and much in need of gentle removal, while the play is 
still good, and the comedy has not yet become tragic ; and 
to be a little swift about it withal ; and so to escape the 
otherwise inevitable evil day ! This Britain might learn : 
but she does not need a protocolling establishment, with 
much * having the honour to be,' to teach it her. 

No : she has in fact certain cottons, hardwares and such- 
like to sell in foreign parts, and certain wines, Portugal 
oranges, Baltic tar and other products to buy ; and does 
need, I suppose, some kind of Consul, or accredited agent, 
accessible to British voyagers, here and there, in the chief 
cities of the Continent : through which functionary, or through 
the penny-post, if she had any specific message to foreign 
courts, it would be easy and proper to transmit the same. 
Special message-carriers, to be still called Ambassadors, if 
the name gratified them, could be sent when occasion great 
enough demanded ; not sent when it did not. But for all 
purposes of a resident ambassador, I hear persons extensively 
and well acquainted among our foreign embassies at this date 



in.] DOWNING STREET 91 

declare, That a well-selected Times reporter or 'own corre- 
spondent ' ordered to reside in foreign capitals, and keep his 
eyes open, and (though sparingly) his pen going, would in 
reality be much more effective ; and surely we see well, he 
would come a good deal cheaper ! Considerably cheaper in 
expense of money ; and in expense of falsity and grimacing 
hypocrisy (of which no human arithmetic can count the 
ultimate cost) incalculably cheaper ! If this is the fact, why 
not treat it as such ? If this is so in any measure, we had 
better in that measure admit it to be so ! The time, I 
believe, has come for asking with considerable severity, How far 
is it so ? Nay, there are men now current in political society, 
men of weight though also of wit, who have been heard to 
say, " That there was but one reform for the Foreign Office, 
to set a live coal under it," and with, of course, a fire- 
brigade which could prevent the undue spread of the devour- 
ing element into neighbouring houses, let that reform it ! In 
such odour is the Foreign Office too, if it were not that the 
Public, oppressed and nearly stifled with a mere infinitude of 
bad odours, neglects this one, in fact, being able nearly 
always to avoid the street where it is, escapes this one, and 
(except a passing curse, once in the quarter or so) as good as 
forgets the existence of it. 

Such, from sad personal experience and credited prevailing 
rumour, is the exoteric public conviction about these sublime 
establishments in Downing Street and the neighbourhood, 
the esoteric mysteries of which are indeed still held sacred by 
the initiated, but believed by the world to be mere Dalai- 
Lama pills, manufactured let not refined lips hint how, and 
quite wwsalvatory to mankind. Every one may remark what a 
hope animates the eyes of any circle, when it is reported or 
even confidently asserted, that Sir Robert Peel has in his mind 
privately resolved to go, one day, into that stable of King 
Augias, which appals human hearts, so rich is it, high-piled 
with the droppings of two-hundred years ; and Hercules-like 



92 LATTER- DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

to load a thousand night-wagons from it, and turn running 
water into it, and swash and shovel at it, and never leave it 
till the antique pavement, and real basis of the matter, show 
itself clean again ! In any intelligent circle such a rumour, 
like the first break of day to men in darkness, enlightens all 
eyes ; and each says devoutly, ** Faxitis, O ye righteous 
Powers that have pity on us ! All England grateful, with 
kindling looks, will rise in the rear of him, and from its 
deepest heart bid him good speed ! " 

For it is universally felt that some esoteric man, well 
acquainted with the mysteries and properties good and evil of 
the administrative stable, is the fittest to reform it, nay, can 
alone reform it otherwise than by sheer violence and destruc- 
tion, which is a way we would avoid ; that in fact Sir Robert 
Peel is, at present, the one likely or possible man to reform 
it. And secondly it is felt that ' reform ' in that Downing- 
Street department of affairs is precisely the reform which were 
worth all others ; that those administrative establishments in 
Downing Street are really the Government of this huge 
ungoverned Empire; that to clean-out the dead pedantries, 
unveracities, indolent somnolent impotences, and accumulated 
dung-mountains there, is the beginning of all practical good 
whatsoever. Yes, get down once again to the actual pavement 
of that ; ascertain what the thing is, and was before dung 
accumulated in it ; and what it should and may, and must, 
for the life's sake of this Empire, henceforth become : here 
clearly lies the heart of the whole matter. Political reform, 
if this be not reformed, is naught and a me1*e mockery. 

What England wants, and will require to have, or sink in 
nameless anarchies, is not a Reformed Parliament, meaning 
thereby a Parliament elected according to the six or the four 
or any other number of * points ' and cunningly-devised 
improvements in hustings mechanism, but a Reformed Execu- 
tive or Sovereign Body of Rulers and Administrators, some 
improved method, innumerable improvements in our poor 
blind methods, of getting hold of these. Not a better 



Hi.] DOWNING STREET 93 

Talking-Apparatus, the best conceivable Talking- Apparatus 
would do very little for us at present ; but an infinitely 
better Acting- Apparatus, the benefits of which would be 
invaluable now and henceforth. The practical question puts 
itself with ever-increasing stringency to all English minds : 
Can we, by no industry, energy, utmost expenditure of human 
ingenuity, and passionate invocation of the Heavens and the 
Earth, get to attain some twelve or ten or six men to manage 
the affairs of this nation in Downing Street and the chief 
posts elsewhere, who are abler for the work than those we 
have been used to, this long while ? For it is really a heroic 
work, and cannot be done by histrios, and dextrous talkers 
having the honour to be : it is a heavy and appalling work ; 
and, at the starting of it especially, will require Herculean 
men ; such mountains of pedant exuviae and obscene owl- 
droppings have accumulated in those regions, long the habita- 
tion of doleful creatures ; the old pavements, the natural 
facts and real essential functions of those establishments, have 
not been seen by eyes for these two-hundred years last past ! 
Herculean men acquainted with the virtues of running water, 
and with the divine necessity of getting down to the clear 
pavements and old veracities ; who tremble before no amount 
of pedant exuviae, no loudest shrieking of doleful creatures ; 
who tremble only to live, themselves, like inane phantasms, 
and to leave their life as a paltry contribution to the guano 
mountains, and not as a divine eternal protest against them ! 
These are the kind of men we want ; these, the nearest 
possible approximation to these, are the men we must find 
and have, or go bankrupt altogether ; for the concern as it is 
will evidently not hold long together. How true is this of 
Crabbe : * Men sit in Parliament eighty-three hours per week, 
debating about many things. Men sit in Downing Street, 
doing protocols, Syrian treaties, Greek questions, Portuguese, 
Spanish, French, Egyptian and ^Ethiopian questions ; dex- 
trously writing despatches, and having the honour to be. 
Not a question of them is at all pressing in comparison with 



94 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

the English question. Pacifico the miraculous Gibraltar Jew 
has been hustled by some populace in Greece : upon him let 
the British Lion drop, very rapidly indeed, a constitutional 
tear. Radetzky is said to be advancing upon Milan ; I 
am sorry to hear it, and perhaps it does deserve a despatch, 
or friendly letter, once and away : but the Irish Giant, named 
of Despair, is advancing upon London itself, laying waste all 
English cities, towns and villages ; that is the interesting 
Government-despatch of the day ! I notice him in Piccadilly, 
blue-visaged, thatched in rags, a blue child on each arm ; 
hunger-driven, wide-mouthed, seeking whom he may devour : 
he, missioned by the just Heavens, too truly and too sadly 
their " divine missionary " come at last in this authoritative 
manner, will throw us all into Doubting Castle, I perceive ! 
That is the phenomenon worth protocoling about, and 
writing despatches upon, and thinking of with all one's 
faculty day and night, if one wishes to have the honour to be 
anything but a Phantasm Governor of England just now ! 
I entreat your Lordship's ail-but undivided attention to that 
Domestic Irish Giant, named of Despair, for a great many 
years to come. Prophecy of him there has long been ; but 
now by the rot of the potato (blessed be the just gods, 
who send us either swift death or some beginning of cure 
at last !), he is here in person, and there is no denying him, 
or disregarding him any more ; and woe to the public watch- 
man that ignores him, and sees Pacifico the Gibraltar Jew 
instead ! ' 



What these strange Entities in Downing Street intrinsically 
are ; who made them, why they were made ; how they do 
their function ; and what their function, so huge in appear- 
ance, may in net-result amount to, is probably known to no 
mortal. The unofficial mind passes by in dark wonder ; not 
pretending to know. The official mind must not blab ; the 
official mind, restricted to its own square foot of territory in 



in.] DOWNING STREET 95 

the vast labyrinth, is probably itself dark, and unable to blab. 
We see the outcome ; the mechanism we do not see. How the 
tailors clip and sew, in that sublime sweating establishment 
of theirs we know not : that the coat they bring us out is 
the sorrowfulest fantastic mockery of a coat, a mere intricate 
artistic net-work of traditions and formalities, an embroiled 
reticulation made of web-listings and superannuated thrums 
and tatters, endurable to no grown Nation as a coat, is 
mournfully clear ! 

Two kinds of fundamental error are supposable in such a 
set of Offices ; these two, acting and reacting, are the vice of 
all inefficient Offices whatever. First, that the work, such as 
it may be, is ill-done in these establishments. That it is 
delayed, neglected, slurred over, committed to hands that 
cannot do it well ; that, in a word, the questions sent thither 
are not wisely handled, but unwisely ; not decided truly and 
rapidly, but with delays and wrong at last : which is the 
principal character, and the infallible result, of an insufficient 
Intellect being set to decide them. Or second, what is still 
fataler, the work done there may itself be quite the wrong 
kind of work. Not the kind of supervision and direction 
which Colonies, and other such interests, Home or Foreign, 
do by the nature of them require from the Central Govern- 
ment ; not that, but a quite other kind ! The Sotomayor 
correspondence, for example, is considered by many persons 
not to be mismanaged merely, but to be a thing which should 
never have been managed at all ; a quite superfluous concern, 
which and the like of which the British Government has 
almost no call to get into, at this new epoch of time. 
And not Sotomayor only, nor Sapienza only, in regard to 
that Foreign Office, but innumerable other things, if our 
witty friend of the ' live coal ' have reason in him ! Of the 
Colonial Office, too, it is urged that the questions they 
decide and operate upon are, in very great part, questions 
which they never should have meddled with, but almost all 
of which should have been decided in the Colonies themselves, 



96 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Mother Country or Colonial Office reserving its energy for 
a quite other class of objects, which are terribly neglected 
just now. 

These are the two vices that beset Government Offices ; 
both of them originating in insufficient Intellect, that sad 
insufficiency from which, directly or indirectly, all evil what- 
soever springs ! And these two vices act and react, so that 
where the one is, the other is sure to be ; and each encourag- 
ing the growth of the other, both (if some cleaning of the 
Augias stable have not intervened for a long while) will be 
found in frightful development. You cannot have your work 
well done, if the work be not of the right kind, if it be not 
work prescribed by the law of Nature as well as by the rules 
of the office. Laziness, which lies in wait round all human 
labour-offices, will in that case infallibly leak in, and vitiate 
the doing of the work. The work is but idle ; if the doing 
of it will but pass, what need of more ? The essential 
problem, as the rules of office . prescribe it for you, if Nature 
and Fact say nothing, is that your work be got to pass ; if 
the work itself is worth nothing, or little or an uncertain 
quantity, what more can gods or men require of it, or, above 
all, can I who am the doer of it require, but that it be got 
to pass ? 

And now enters another fatal effect, the mother of ever- 
new mischiefs, which renders well-doing or improvement 
impossible, and drives bad everywhere continually into worse. 
The work being what we see, a stupid subaltern will do as 
well as a gifted one ; the essential point is, that he be a quiet 
one, and do not bother me who have the driving of him. 
Nay, for this latter object, is not a certain height of intelli- 
gence even dangerous ? I want no mettled Arab horse, with 
his flashing glances, arched neck and elastic step, to draw my 
wretched sand-cart through the streets ; a broken, grassfed 
galloway, Irish garron, or painful ass with nothing in the 
belly of him but patience and furze, will do it safelier for me, 
if more slowly. Nay, I myself, am I the worse for being of a 



ill.] DOWNING STREET 97 

feeble order of intelligence ; what the irreverent speculative 
world calls barren, redtapish, limited, and even intrinsically 
dark and small, and if it must be said, stupid ? To such a 
climax does it come in all Government and other Offices, 
where Human Stupidity has once introduced itself (as it will 
everywhere do), and no Scavenger God intervenes. The 
work, at first of some worth, is ill done, and becomes of less 
worth and of ever less, and finally of none : the worthless 
work can now afford to be ill done ; and Human Stupidity, 
at a double geometrical ratio, with frightful expansion grows 
and accumulates, towards the unendurable. 

The reforming Hercules, Sir Robert Peel or whoever he is 
to be, that enters Downing Street, will ask himself this 
question first of all, What work is now necessary, not in 
form and by traditionary use and wont, but in very fact, for 
the vital interests of the British Nation, to be done here ? 
The second question, How to get it well done, and to keep 
the best hands doing it well, will be greatly simplified by a 
good answer to that. O for an eye that could see in those 
hideous mazes, and a heart that could dare and do! Strenuous 
faithful scrutiny, not of what is thought to be what in the 
redtape regions, but of what really is what in the realms of 
Fact and Nature herself; deep-seeing, wise and courageous 
eyes, that could look through innumerable cobweb veils, and 
detect what fact or no-fact lies at heart of them, how in- 
valuable these ! For, alas, it is long since such eyes were 
much in the habit of looking steadfastly at any department 
of our affairs ; and poor commonplace creatures, helping 
themselves along, in the way of makeshift, from year to year, 
in such an element, do wonderful works indeed. Such 
creatures, like moles, are safe only underground, and their 
engineerings there become very daedalean. In fact, such 
unfortunate persons have no resource but to become what 
we call Pedants ; to ensconce themselves in a safe world of 
habitudes, of applicable or inapplicable traditions ; not covet- 
ing, rather avoiding the general daylight of common-sense, as 



98 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

very extraneous to them and their procedure ; by long per- 
sistence in which course they become Completed Pedants, 
hide-bound, impenetrable, able to defy the hostile extraneous 
element : an alarming kind of men. Such men, left to them- 
selves for a century or two, in any Colonial, Foreign, or other 
Office, will make a terrible affair of it ! 

For the one enemy we have in this Universe is Stupidity, 
Darkness of Mind ; of which darkness, again, there are many 
sources, every sin a source, and probably self-conceit the chief 
source. Darkness of mind, in every kind and variety, does to 
a really tragic extent abound : but of all the kinds of dark- 
ness, surely the Pedant darkness, which asserts and believes 
itself to be light, is the most formidable to mankind ! For 
empires or for individuals there is but one class of men to 
be trembled at ; and that is the Stupid Class, the class 
that cannot see, who, alas, are they mainly that will not 
see. A class of mortals under which as administrators, 
kings, priests, diplomatists, etc., the interests of man- 
kind in every European country have sunk overloaded, as 
under universal nightmare, near to extinction ; and indeed 
are at this moment convulsively writhing, decided either to 
throw off the unblessed superincumbent nightmare, or roll 
themselves and it to the Abyss. Vain to reform Parliament, 
to invent ballot-boxes, to reform this or that ; the real 
Administration, practical Management of the Commonwealth, 
goes all awry ; choked-up with long-accumulated pedantries, 
so that your appointed workers have been reduced to work as 
moles ; and it is one vast boring and counterboring, on the 
part of eyeless persons irreverently called stupid ; and a 
daedalean bewilderment, writing ' impossible ' on all efforts or 
proposals, supervenes. 



The State itself, not in Downing Street alone but in every 
department of it, has altered much from what it was in past 



in.] DOWNING STREET 99 

times ; and it will again have to alter very much, to alter, I 
think, from top to bottom, if it means to continue existing in 
the times that are now coming and come ! 

The State, left to shape itself by dim pedantries and 
traditions, without distinctness of conviction, or purpose 
beyond that of helping itself over the difficulty of the hour, 
has become, instead of a luminous vitality permeating with 
its light all provinces of our affairs, a most monstrous 
agglomerate of inanities, as little adapted for the actual 
wants of a modern community as the worst citizen need wish. 
The thing it is doing is by no means the thing we want to 
have done. What we want ! Let the dullest British man 
endeavour to raise in his mind this question, and ask himself 
in sincerity what the British Nation wants at this time. Is 
it to have, with endless jargoning, debating, motioning and 
counter-motioning, a settlement effected between the Honour- 
able Mr. This and the Honourable Mr. That, as to their 
respective pretensions to ride the high horse? Really it is 
unimportant which of them ride it. Going upon past ex- 
perience long continued now, I should say with brevity, 
" Either of them Neither of them." If our Government is 
to be a No-Government, what is the matter who administers 
it ? Fling an orange-skin into St. Jameses Street ; let the 
man it hits be your man. He, if you breed him a little to 
it, and tie the due official bladders to his ankles, will do as 
well as another this sublime problem of balancing himself 
upon the vortexes, with the long loaded-pole in his hands ; 
and will, with straddling painful gestures, float hither and 
thither, walking the waters in that singular manner for a 
little while, as well as his foregoers did, till he also capsize, 
and be left floating feet uppermost ; after which you choose 
another. 

What an immense pother, by parliamenting and palavering 
in all corners of your empire, to decide such a question as 
that ! I say, if that is the function, almost any human 
creature can learn to discharge it : fling out your orange- 



100 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

skin again ; and save an incalculable labour, and an emission 
of nonsense and falsity, and electioneering beer and bribery 
and balderdash, which is terrible to think of, in deciding. 
Your National Parliament, in so far as it has only that 
question to decide, may be considered as an enormous 
National Palaver existing mainly for imaginary purposes ; and 
certain, in these days of abbreviated labour, to get itself sent 
home again to its partridge-shootings, fox-huntings, and 
above all, to its rat-catchings, if it could but understand the 
time of day, and know (as our indignant Crabbe remarks) 
that * the real Nimrod of this era, who alone does any good to 
the era, is the rat-catcher ! ' 

The notion that any Government is or can be a No- 
Government, without the deadliest peril to all noble interests 
of the Commonwealth, and by degrees slower or swifter to all 
ignoble ones also, and to the very gullydrains, and thief 
lodging-houses, and Mosaic sweating establishments, and at 
last without destruction to such No-Government itself, was 
never my notion : and I hope it will soon cease altogether to 
be the world's or to be anybody's. But if it be the correct 
notion, as the world seems at present to flatter itself, I point 
out improvements and abbreviations. Dismiss your National 
Palaver ; make the Times Newspaper your National Palaver, 
which needs no beer-barrels or hustings, and is cheaper in 
expense of money and of falsity a thousand and a million 
fold; have an economical redtape drilling establishment (it 
were easier to devise such a thing than a right Modern 
University); and fling out your orange-skin among the 
graduates, when you want a new Premier. 

A mighty question indeed ! Who shall be Premier, and 
take in hand the ' rudder of government,' otherwise called 
the * spigot of taxation ' ; shall it be the Honourable Felix 
Parvulus, or the Right Honourable Felicissimus Zero ? By 
our electioneerings and Hansard Debatings, and ever-enduring 
tempest of jargon that goes on everywhere, we manage to 
settle that ; to have it declared, with no bloodshed except 



in.] DOWNING STREET 101 

insignificant blood from the nose in hustings-time, but with 
immense beershed and inkshed and explosion of nonsense, 
which darkens all the air, that the Right Honourable Zero is 
to be the man. That we firmly settle ; Zero, all shivering 
with rapture and with terror, mounts into the high saddle ; 
cramps himself on, with knees, heels, hands and feet ; and the 
horse gallops whither it lists. That the Right Honourable 
Zero should attempt controlling the horse Alas, alas, he, 
sticking on with beak and claws, is too happy if the horse 
will only gallop anywhither, and not throw him. Measure, 
polity, plan or scheme of public good or evil, is not in the 
head of Felicissimus ; except, if he could but devise it, some 
measure that would please his horse for the moment, and 
encourage him to go with softer paces, godward or devilward 
as it might be, and save Felicissimus' ) s leather, which is fast 
wearing. This is what we call a Government in England, for 
nearly two centuries now. 

I wish Felicissimus were saddle-sick forever and a day ! 
He is a dreadful object, however much we are used to him. 
If the horse had not been bred and broken in, for a thousand 
years, by real riders and horse-subduers, perhaps the best and 
bravest the world ever saw, what would have become of Feli- 
cissimus and him long since ? This horse, by second-nature, 
religiously respects all fences ; gallops, if never so madly, on 
the highways alone ; seems to me, of late, like a desperate 
Sleswick thunder-horse who had lost his way, galloping in the 
labyrinthic lanes of a woody flat country ; passionate to reach 
his goal ; unable to reach it, because in the flat leafy lanes 
there is no outlook whatever, and in the bridle there is no 
guidance whatever. So he gallops stormfully along, thinking 
it is forward and forward ; and alas, it is only round and 
round, out of one old lane into the other ; nay, (according 
to some) * he mistakes his own footprints^ which of course 
grow ever more numerous, for the sign of a more and more 
frequented road ' ; and his despair is hourly increasing. My 
impression is. he is certain soon, such is the growth of his 



102 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

necessity and his despair, to plunge across the fence, into an 
opener survey of the country ; and to sweep Felicissimus oft* 
his back, and comb him away very tragically in the process ! 
Poor Sleswicker, I wish you were better ridden. I perceive it 
lies in the Fates you must now either be better ridden, or else 
not long at all. This plunging in the heavy labyrinth of 
over-shaded lanes, with one's stomach getting empty, one's 
Ireland falling into cannibalism, and no vestige of a goal 
either visible or possible, cannot last. 

Colonial Offices, Foreign, Home and other Offices, got 
together under these strange circumstances, cannot well be 
expected to be the best that human ingenuity could devise ; 
the wonder rather is to see them so good as they are. Who 
made them, ask me not. Made they clearly were ; for we see 
them here in a concrete condition, writing despatches, and 
drawing salary with a view to buy pudding. But how those 
Offices in Downing Street were made ; who made them, or for 
what kind of objects they were made, would be hard to say at 
present. Dim visions and phantasmagories gathered from the 
Books of Horace Walpole, Memoirs of Bubb Doddington, 
Memoirs of my Lady Sundon, Lord Fanny Hervey, and 
innumerable others, rise on us, beckoning fantastically 
towards, not an answer, but some conceivable intimations of 
an answer, and proclaiming very legibly the old text, * Quam 
parva sapiential in respect of this hard-working much-sub- 
duing British Nation ; giving rise to endless reflections in a 
thinking Englishman of this day. Alas, it is ever so : each 
generation has its task, and does it better or worse ; greatly 
neglecting what is not immediately its task. Our poor 
grandfathers, so busy conquering Indias, founding Colonies, 
inventing spinning-jennies, kindling Lancashires and Brom- 
wichams, took no thought about the government of all that ; 
left it all to be governed by Lord Fanny and the Hanover 
Succession, or how the gods pleased. And now we the poor 
grandchildren find that it will not stick together on these 
terms any longer ; that our sad, dangerous and sore task is to 



IH.J DOWNING STREET 103 

discover some government for this big world which has been 
conquered to us ; that the redtape Offices in Downing Street 
are near the end of their rope ; that if we can get nothing 
better, in the way of government, it is all over with our world 
and us. How the Downing-Street Offices originated, and 
what the meaning of them was or is, let Dryasdust, when 
in some lucid moment the whim takes him, instruct us. 
Enough for us to know and see clearly, with urgent practical 
inference derived from such insight, That they were not made 
for us or for our objects at all ; that the devouring Irish 
Giant is here, and that he cannot be fed with redtape, and 
will eat us if we cannot feed him. 

On the whole, let us say Felicissimus made them ; or 
rather it was the predecessors of Felicissimus, who were not 
so dreadfully hunted, sticking to the wild and ever more 
desperate Sleswicker in the leafy labyrinth of lanes, as he now 
is. He, I think, will never make anything ; but be combed 
off by the elm-boughs, and left sprawling in the ditch. But 
in past time, this and the other heavy-laden redtape soul had 
withal a glow of patriotism in him ; now and then, in his 
whirling element, a gleam of human ingenuity, some eye 
towards business that must be done. At all events, for him 
and every one, Parliament needed to be persuaded that 
business was done. By the contributions of many such 
heavy-laden souls, driven on by necessity outward and inward, 
these singular Establishments are here. Contributions who 
knows how far back they go, far beyond the reign of George 
the Second, or perhaps the reign of William Conqueror. 
Noble and genuine some of them were, many of them were, I 
need not doubt : for there is no human edifice that stands 
long out has got itself planted, here and there, upon the 
basis of fact ; and being built, in many respects, according to 
the laws of statics : no standing edifice, especially no edifice 
of State, but has had the wise and brave at work in it, con- 
tributing their lives to it ; and is ' cemented,' whether it 
know the fact or not, * by the blood of heroes ! ' None ; not 



104 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

even the Foreign Office, Home Office, still less the National 
Palaver itself. William Conqueror, I find, must have had a 
first-rate Home Office, for his share. The Domesday Book, 
done in four years, and done as it is, with such an admirable 
brevity, explicitness and completeness, testifies emphatically 
what kind of under- secretaries and officials William had. 
Silent officials and secretaries, I suppose ; not wasting them- 
selves in parliamentary talk ; reserving all their intelligence 
for silent survey of the huge dumb fact, silent consideration 
how they might compass the mastery of that. Happy 
secretaries, happy William ! 

But indeed nobody knows what inarticulate traditions, 
remnants of old wisdom, priceless though quite anonymous, 
survive in many modern things that still have life in them. 
Ben Brace, with his taciturnities, and rugged stoical ways, 
with his tarry breeches, stiff as plank-breeches, I perceive is 
still a kind of Lod-brog (Loaded-breeks) in more senses than 
one ; and derives, little conscious of it, many of his excellences 
from the old Sea-kings and Saxon Pirates themselves ; and 
how many Blakes and Nelsons since have contributed to Ben ! 
" Things are not so false always as they seem," said a certain 
Professor to me once : " of this you will find instances in 
every country, and in your England more than any and I 
hope will draw lessons from them. An English Seventy-four, 
if you look merely at the articulate law and methods of it, is 
one of the impossiblest entities. The captain is appointed 
not by preeminent merit in sailorship, but by parliamentary 
connexion ; the men " (this was spoken some years ago) " are 
got by impressment ; a press-gang goes out, knocks men 
down on the streets of sea-towns, and drags them on board, 
if the ship were to be stranded, I have heard they would 
nearly all run ashore and desert. Can anything be more 
unreasonable than a Seventy-four? Articulately almost 
nothing. But it has inarticulate traditions, ancient methods 
and habitudes in it, stoicisms, noblenesses, true rules both of 
sailing and of conduct ; enough to keep it afloat on NatmVs 



m.J DOWNING STREET 105 

veridical bosom, after all. See ; if you bid it sail to the end 
of the world, it will lift anchor, go, and arrive. The raging 
oceans do not beat it back ; it too, as well as the raging 
oceans, has a relationship to Nature, and it does not sink, 
but under the due conditions is borne along. If it meet 
with hurricanes, it rides them out; if it meet an Enemy's 
ship, it shivers it to powder ; and in short, it holds on its 
way, and to a wonderful extent does what it means and 
pretends to do. Assure yourself, my^ friend, there is an 
immense fund of truth somewhere or other stowed in that 
Seventy-four." 



More important than the past history of these Offices in 
Downing Street, is the question of their future history ; the 
question, How they are to be got mended ! Truly an 
immense problem, inclusive of all others whatsoever; which 
demands to be attacked, and incessantly persisted in, by all 
good citizens, as the grand problem of Society, and the one 
thing needful for the Commonwealth ! A problem in which 
all men, with all their wisdoms and all their virtues, faithfully 
and continually cooperating at it, will never have done enough, 
and will still only be struggling towards perfection in it. In 
which some men can do much ; in which every man can do 
something. Every man, and thou my present Reader canst 
do this : Be thyself a man abler to be governed ; more 
reverencing the divine faculty of governing, more sacredly 
detesting the diabolical semblance of said faculty in self and 
others ; so shalt thou, if not govern, yet actually according 
to thy strength assist in real governing. And know always, 
and even lay to heart with a quite unusual solemnity, with a 
seriousness altogether of a religious nature, that as ' Human 
Stupidity ' is verily the accursed parent of all this mischief, so 
Human Intelligence alone, to which and to which only is 
victory and blessedness appointed here below, will or can cure 
it. If we knew this as devoutly as we ought to do, the evil, 



106 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

and all other evils were curable ; alas, if we had from of 
old known this, as all men made in God's image ought to do, 
the evil never would have been ! Perhaps few Nations have 
ever known it less than we, for a good while back, have done. 
Hence these sorrows. 

What a people are the poor Thibet idolaters, compared 
with us and our * religions/ which issue in the worship of 
King Hudson as our Dalai- Lama ! They, across such hulls 
of abject ignorance, have seen into the heart of the matter ; 
we, with our torches of knowledge everywhere brandishing 
themselves, and such a human enlightenment as never was 
before, have quite missed it. Reverence for Human Worth, 
earnest devout search for it and encouragement of it, loyal 
furtherance and obedience to it : this, I say, is the outcome 
and essence of all true ' religions,' and was and ever will be. 
We have not known this. No ; loud as our tongues some- 
times go in that direction, we have no true reverence for 
Human Intelligence, for Human Worth and Wisdom : none, 
or too little, and I pray for a restoration of such reverence, 
as for the change from Stygian darkness to Heavenly light, 
as for the return of life to poor sick moribund Society and 
all its interests. Human Intelligence means little for most 
of us but Beaver Contrivance, which produces spinning mules, 
cheap cotton, and large fortunes. Wisdom, unless it give us 
railway scrip, is not wise. 

True nevertheless it forever remains that Intellect is the 
real object of reverence, and of devout prayer, and zealous wish 
and pursuit, among the sons of men ; and even, well under- 
stood, the one object. It is the Inspiration of the Almighty 
that giveth men understanding. For it must be repeated, 
and ever again repeated till poor mortals get to discern it, 
and awake from their baleful paralysis, and degradation under 
foul enchantments, That a man of Intellect, of real and not 
sham Intellect, is by the nature of him likewise inevitably a 
man of nobleness, a man of courage, rectitude, pious strength ; 
who, even because he is and has been loyal to the Laws of 



in.] DOWNING STREET 107 

this Universe, is initiated into discernment of the same ; to 
this hour a Missioned of Heaven ; whom if men follow, it 
will be well with them ; whom if men do not follow, it will 
not be well. Human Intellect, if you consider it well, is the 
exact summary of Human Worth ; and the essence of all 
worth-ships and worships is reverence for that same. This 
much surprises you, friend Peter ; but I assure you it is the 
faot ; and I would advise you to consider it, and to try if 
you too do not gradually find it so. With me it has long 
been an article, not of * faith ' only, but of settled insight, of 
conviction as to what the ordainments of the Maker in this 
Universe are. Ah, could you and the rest of us but get to 
know it, and everywhere religiously act upon it, as our 
Fortieth Article, which includes all the other Thirty-nine, 
and without which the Thirty-nine are good for almost 
nothing, there might then be some hope for us ! In this 
world there is but one appalling creature : the Stupid man 
considered to be the Missioned of Heaven, and followed by 
men. He is our King, men say, he ; and they follow him, 
through straight or winding courses, I for one know well 
whitherward. 

Abler men in Downing Street, abler men to govern us : 
yes, that, sure enough, would gradually remove the dung- 
mountains, however high they are ; that would be the way, 
nor is there any other way, to remedy whatsoever has gone 
wrong in Downing Street and in the wide regions, spiritual 
and temporal, which Downing Street presides over ! For the 
Able Man, meet him where you may, is definable as the born 
enemy of Falsity and Anarchy, and the born soldier of Truth 
and Order : into what absurdest element soever you put him, 
he is there to make it a little less absurd, to fight continually 
with it till it become a little sane and human again. Peace 
on other terms he, for his part, cannot make with it ; not he, 
while he continues able, or possessed of real intellect and not 
imaginary. There is but one man fraught with blessings for 
this world, fated to diminish and successively abolish the 



108 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

curses of the world ; and it is he. For him make search, 
him reverence and follow ; know that to find him or miss 
him, means victory or defeat for you, in all Downing Streets, 

and establishments and enterprises here below. 1 leave 

your Lordship to judge whether this has been our practice 
hitherto ; and would humbly inquire what your Lordship 
thinks is likely to be the consequence of continuing to neglect 
this. It ought to have been our practice ; ought, in all 
places and all times, to be the practice in this world ; so says 
the fixed law of things forevermore : and it must cease to 
be not the practice, your Lordship ; and cannot too speedily 
do so, I think ! 

Much has been done in the way of reforming Parliament 
in late years ; but that of itself seems to avail nothing, or 
almost less. The men that sit in Downing Street, governing 
us, are not abler men since the Reform Bill than were those 
before it. Precisely the same kind of men ; obedient formerly 
to Tory traditions, obedient now to Whig ditto and popular 
clamours. Respectable men of office : respectably common- 
place in faculty, while the situation is becoming terribly 
original ! Rendering their outlooks, and ours, more ominous 
every day. 

Indisputably enough the meaning of all reform-movement, 
electing and electioneering, of popular agitation, parlia- 
mentary eloquence, and all political effort whatsoever, is that 
you may get the ten Ablest Men in England put to preside 
over your ten principal departments of affairs. To sift and 
riddle the Nation, so that you might extricate and sift-out 
the true ten gold grains, or ablest men, and of these make 
your Governors or Public Officers ; leaving the dross and 
common sandy or silty material safely aside, as the thing to 
be governed, not to govern ; certainly all ballot-boxes, 
caucuses, Kennington-Common meetings, Parliamentary de- 
batings, Red Republics, Russian Despotisms, and constitu- 
tional or unconstitutional methods of society among man- 
kind, are intended to achieve this one end ; and some of 



in.] DOWNING STREET 109 

them, it will be owned, achieve it very ill ! If you have got 
your gold grains, if the men you have got are actually the 
ablest, then rejoice ; with whatever astonishment, accept your 
Ten, and thank the gods ; under this Ten your destruction 
will at least be milder than under another. But if you have 
not got them, if you are very far from having got them, then 
do not rejoice at all, then lament very much ; then admit 
that your sublime political constitutions and contrivances do 
not prove themselves sublime, but ridiculous and contemptible; 
that your world's wonder of a political mill, the envy of 
surrounding nations, does not yield you real meal ; yields you 
only powder of millstones (called Hansard Debatings), and a 
detestable brown substance not unlike the grindings of dried 
horse-dung or prepared street-mud, which though sold under 
royal patent, and much recommended by the trade, is quite 
unfit for culinary purposes ! 

But the disease at least is not mysterious, whatever the 
remedy be. Our disease, alas, is it not clear as the sun, 
that we suffer under what is the disease of all the miserable 
in this world, want of wisdom ; that in the Head there is no 
vision, and that thereby all the members are dark and in 
bonds ? No vision in the head ; heroism, faith, devout 
insight to discern what is needful, noble courage to do it, 
greatly defective there : not seeing eyes there, but spectacles 
constitutionally ground, which, to the unwary, seem to see. A 
quite fatal circumstance, had you never so many Parliaments ! 
How is your ship to be steered by a Pilot with no eyes but a 
pair of glass ones got from the constitutional optician ? He 
must steer by the ear, I think, rather than by the eye ; by 
the shoutings he catches from the shore, or from the Parlia- 
mentary benches nearer hand : one of the frightfulest 
objects to see steering in a difficult sea ! Reformed Parlia- 
ments in that case, reform-leagues, outer agitations and 
excitements in never such abundance, cannot profit : all this 
is but the writhing, and painful blind convulsion of the limbs 



110 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

that are in bonds, that are all in dark misery till the head 
be delivered, till the pressure on the brain be removed. 

Or perhaps there is now no heroic wisdom left in England ; 
England, once the land of heroes, is itself sunk now to a dim 
owlery, and habitation of doleful creatures, intent only on 
money-making and other forms of catching mice, for whom 
the proper gospel is the gospel of M'Croudy, and all nobler 
impulses and insights are forbidden henceforth ? Perhaps 
these present agreeable Occupants of Downing Street, such as 
the parliamentary mill has yielded them, are the best the 
miserable soil has grown ? The most Herculean Ten Men 
that could be found among the English Twenty-seven Millions, 
are these ? There are not, in any place, under any figure, ten 
diviner men among us ? Well ; in that case, the riddling 
and searching of the twenty-seven millions has been successful. 
Here are our ten divinest men ; with these, unhappily not 
divine enough, we must even content ourselves and die in 
peace ; what help is there ? No help, no hope, in that case. 

But, again, if these are not our divinest men, then evidently 
there always is hope, there always is possibility of help ; and 
ruin never is quite inevitable, till we have sifted out our 
actually divinest ten, and set these to try their hand at 
governing ! That this has been achieved ; that these ten men 
are the most Herculean souls the English population held 
within it, is a proposition credible to no mortal. No, thank 
God ; low as we are sunk in many ways, this is not yet 
credible ! Evidently the reverse of this proposition is the fact. 
Ten much diviner men do certainly exist. By some conceiv- 
able, not forever impossible, method and methods, ten very 
much diviner men could be sifted out ! Courage ; let us fix 
our eyes on that important fact, and strive all thitherward as 
towards a door of hope ! 

Parliaments, I think, have proved too well, in late years, 
that they are not the remedy. It is not Parliaments, reformed 
or other, that will ever send Herculean men to Downing 



III.] DOWNING STREET 111 

Street, to reform Downing Street for us ; to diffuse therefrom 
a light of Heavenly Order, instead of the murk of Stygian 
Anarchy, over this sad world of ours. That function does 
not lie in the capacities of Parliament. That is the function 
of a Kwg, if we could get such a priceless entity, which we 
cannot just now ! Failing which, Statesmen, or Temporary- 
Kings, and at the very lowest one real Statesman, to shape 
the dim tendencies of Parliament, and guide them wisely to 
the goal : he, I perceive, will be a primary condition, indis- 
pensable for any progress whatsoever. 

One such, perhaps, might be attained ; one such might 
prove discoverable among our Parliamentary populations ? 
That one, in such an enterprise as this of Downing Street, 
might be invaluable ! One noble man, at once of natural 
wisdom and practical experience ; one Intellect still really 
human, and not redtapish, owlish, and pedantical, appearing 
there in that dim chaos, with word of command ; to brandish 
Hercules-like the divine broom and shovel, and turn running 
water in upon the place, and say as with a fiat, " Here shall be 
truth, and real work, and talent to do it henceforth ; I will seek 
for able men to work here, as for the elixir of life to this poor 
place and me " : what might not one such man effect there ! 

Nay, one such is not to be dispensed with anywhere in the 
affairs of men. In every ship, I say, there must be a seeing 
pilot, not a mere hearing one ! It is evident you can never 
get your ship steered through the difficult straits by persons 
standing ashore, on this bank and that, and shouting their 
confused directions to you : " 'Ware that Colonial Sandbank ! 
Starboard now, the Nigger Question ! Larboard, lar- 
board, the Suffrage Movement ! Financial Reform, your 
Clothing- Colonels overboard ! The Qualification Move- 
ment, 'Ware-re-re ! Helm-a-lee ! Bear a hand there, will 
you ! Hr-r-r, lubbers, imbeciles, fitter for a tailor's shop- 
board than a helm of Government, Hr-r-r ! " And so the 
ship wriggles and tumbles, and, on the whole, goes as wind 
and current drive. No ship was ever steered except to 



112 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

destruction in that manner. I deliberately say so : no ship 
of a State either. If you cannot get a real pilot on board, 
and put the helm into his hands, your ship is as good as a 
wreck. One real pilot on board may save you ; all the bellow- 
ing from the banks that ever was, will not and by the nature 
of things cannot. Nay, your pilot will have to succeed, if he 
do succeed, very much in spite of said bellowing ; he will hear 
all that, and regard very little of it, in a patient mild- 
spoken wise manner, will regard all of it as what it is. And 
I never doubt but there is in Parliament itself, in spite of its 
vague palaverings which fill us with despair in these times, a 
dumb instinct of inarticulate sense and stubborn practical 
English insight and veracity, that would manfully support a 
Statesman who could take command with really manful 
notions of Reform, and as one deserving to be obeyed. O for 
one such ; even one ! More precious to us than all the 
bullion in the Bank, or perhaps that ever was in it, just now ! 
For it is Wisdom alone that can recognise wisdom : Folly 
or Imbecility never can ; and that is the fatalest ban it labours 
under, dooming it to perpetual failure in all things. Failure 
which, in Downing Street and places of command, is especially 
accursed ; cursing not one but hundreds of millions ! Who 
is there that can recognise real intellect, and do reverence to 
it ; and discriminate it well from sham intellect, which is so 
much more abundant, and deserves the reverse of reverence ? 
He that himself has it ! One really human Intellect, invested 
with command, and charged to reform Downing Street for us, 
would continually attract real intellect to those regions, and 
with a divine magnetism search it out from the modest 
corners where it lies hid. And every new accession of intellect 
to Downing Street would bring to it benefit only, and would 
increase such divine attraction in it, the parent of all benefit 
there and elsewhere ! 



" What method, then ; by what method ? " ask many. 






in.] DOWNING STREET 113 

Method, alas ! To secure an increased supply of Human 
Intellect to Downing Street, there will evidently be no quite 
effectual f method 1 but that of increasing the supply of Human 
Intellect, otherwise definable as Human Worth, in Society 
generally ; increasing the supply of sacred reverence for it, of 
loyalty to it, and of life-and-death desire and pursuit of it, 
among all classes, if we but knew such a ' method ' ! Alas, 
that were simply the method of making all classes Servants of 
Heaven ; and except it be devout prayer to Heaven, I have 
never heard of any method ! To increase the reverence for 
Human Intellect or God's Light, and the detestation of 
Human Stupidity or the Devil's Darkness, what method is 
there ? No method, except even this, that we should each 
of us * pray ' for it, instead of praying for mere scrip and the 
like ; that Heaven would please to vouchsafe us each a little 
of it, one by one ! As perhaps Heaven, in its infinite bounty, 
by stern methods, gradually will ? Perhaps Heaven has 
mercy too in these sore plagues that are oppressing us ; and 
means to teach us reverence for Heroism and Human Intellect, 
by such baleful experience of what issue Imbecility and Par- 
liamentary Eloquence lead to ? Such reverence, I do hope, 
and even discover and observe, is silently yet extensively going 
on among us even in these sad years. In which small salutary 
fact there burns for us, in this black coil of universal baseness 
fast becoming universal wretchedness, an inextinguishable 
hope ; far-off but sure, a divine ' pillar of fire by night.' 
Courage, courage ! 

Meanwhile, that our one reforming Statesman may have 
free command of what Intellect there is among us, and room 
to try all means for awakening and inviting ever more of it, 
there has one small Project of Improvement been suggested ; 
which finds a certain degree of favour wherever I hear it 
talked of, and which seems to merit much more consideration 
than it has yet received. Practical men themselves approve 
of it hitherto, so far as it goes ; the one objection being that 

H 



114 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

the world is not yet prepared to insist on it, which of 
course the world can never be, till once the world consider it, 
and in the first place hear tell of it ! I have, for my own 
part, a good opinion of this project. The old unreformed 
Parliament of rotten boroughs had one advantage ; but that 
is hereby, in a far more fruitful and effectual manner, secured 
to the new. 

The Proposal is, That Secretaries under and upper, that 
all manner of changeable or permanent servants in the 
Government Offices shall be selected without reference to their 
power of getting into Parliament ; that, in short, the Queen 
shall have power of nominating the half-dozen or half-score 
Officers of the Administration, whose presence is thought 
necessary in Parliament, to official seats there, without refer- 
ence to any constituency but her own only, which of course 
will mean her Prime Minister's. A very small encroach- 
ment on the present constitution of Parliament ; offering the 
minimum of change in present methods, and I almost think 
a maximum in results to be derived therefrom. The Queen 
nominates John Thomas (the fittest man she, much-inquiring, 
can hear tell of in her three kingdoms) President of the 
Poor-Law Board, Under Secretary of the Colonies, Under, 
or perhaps even Upper Secretary of what she and her Premier 
find suitablest for a working head so eminent, a talent so 
precious ; and grants him, by her direct authority, seat and 
vote in Parliament so long as he holds that office. Upper 
Secretaries, having more to do in Parliament, and being so 
bound to be in favour there, would, I suppose, at least till 
new times and habits come, be expected to be chosen from 
among the People's Members as at present. But whether the 
Prime Minister himself is, in all times, bound to be first a 
People's Member ; and which, or how many, of his Secretaries 
and subordinates he might be allowed to take as Queen's 
Members, my authority does not say, perhaps has not him- 
self settled ; the project being yet in mere outline or fore- 
shadow, the practical embodiment in all details to be fixed by 



III.] DOWNING STREET 115 

authorities much more competent than he. The soul of his 
project is, That the Crown also have power to elect a few 
members to Parliament. 

From which project, however wisely it were embodied, there 
could probably, at first or all at once, no great 'accession of 
intellect ' to the Government Offices ensue ; though a little 
might, even at first, and a little is always precious : but in 
its ulterior operation, were that faithfully developed, and 
wisely presided over, I fancy an immense accession of intel- 
lect might ensue ; nay, a natural ingress might thereby be 
opened to all manner of accessions, and the actual flower 
of whatever intellect the British Nation had might be 
attracted towards Downing Street, and continue flowing 
steadily thither ! For, let us see a little what effects this 
simple change carries in it the possibilities of. Here are 
beneficent germs, which the presence of one truly wise man 
as Chief Minister, steadily fostering them for even a few years, 
with the sacred fidelity and vigilance that would beseem him, 
might ripen into living practices and habitual facts, invaluable 
to us all. 

What it is that Secretaries of State, Managers of Colonial 
Establishments, of Home and Foreign Government interests, 
have really and truly to do in Parliament, might admit of 
various estimate in these times. An apt debater in Par- 
liament is by no means certain to be an able administrator 
of Colonies, of Home or Foreign Affairs ; nay, rather quite 
the contrary is to be presumed of him ; for in order to 
become a ' brilliant speaker, 1 if that is his character, con- 
siderable portions of his natural internal endowment must 
have gone to the surface, in order to make a shining figure 
there, and precisely so much the less (few men in these days 
know how much less !) must remain available in the internal 
silent state, or as faculty for thinking, for devising and acting, 
which latter and which alone is the function essential for 
him in his Secretaryship. Not to tell a good story for 
himself 'in Parliament and to the twenty-seven millions, 






116 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

many of them fools ' ; not that, but to do good administra- 
tion, to know with sure eye, and decide with just and resolute 
heart, what is what in the things committed to his charge : 
this and not that, is the service which poor England, whatever 
it may think and maunder, does require and want of the 
Official Man in Downing Street. Given a good Official Man 
or Secretary, he really ought, as far as it is possible, to be left 
working in the silent state. No mortal can both work and 
do good talking in Parliament, or out of it : the feat is 
impossible as that of serving two hostile masters. 

Nor would I, if it could be helped, much trouble my good 
Secretary with addressing Parliament : needful explanations ; 
yes, in a free country, surely ; but not to every frivolous and 
vexatious person, in or out of Parliament, who chooses to 
apply for them. There should be demands for explanation 
too which were reckoned frivolous and vexatious, and censured 
as such. These, I should say, are the not needful explana- 
tions : and if my poor Secretary is to be called out from his 
workshop to answer every one of these, his workshop will 
become (what we at present see it, deservedly or not) little 
other than a pillory ; the poor Secretary a kind of talking- 
machine, exposed to dead -cats and rotten -eggs; and the 
* work ' got out of him or of it will, as heretofore, be very 
inconsiderable indeed ! Alas, on this side also, important 
improvements are conceivable ; and will even, I imagine, get 
them whence we may, be found indispensable one day. The 
honourable gentleman whom you interrupt here, he, in his 
official capacity, is not an individual now, but the embodi- 
ment of a Nation ; he is the ' People of England ' engaged 
in the work of Secretaryship, this one ; and cannot forever 
afford to let the three Tailors of Tooley-street break in upon 
him at all hours ! 

But leaving this, let us remark one thing which is very 
plain : That whatever be the uses and duties, real or sup- 
posed, of a Secretary in Parliament, his faculty to accomplish 
these is a point entirely unconnected with his ability to get 



III.] DOWNING STREET 117 

elected into Parliament, and has no relation or proportion to 
it, and no concern with it whatever. Lord Tommy and the 
Honourable John are not a whit better qualified for Par- 
liamentary duties, to say nothing of Secretary duties, than 
plain Tom and Jack ; they are merely better qualified, as 
matters stand, for getting admitted to try them. Which 
state of matters a reforming Premier, much in want of abler 
men to help him, now proposes altering. Tom and Jack, 
once admitted by the Queen's writ, there is every reason to 
suppose will do quite as well there as Lord Tommy and the 
Honourable John. In Parliament quite as well : and else- 
where, in the other infinitely more important duties of a 
Government Office, which indeed are and remain the essential, 
vital and intrinsic duties of such a personage, is there the 
faintest reason to surmise that Tom and Jack, if well chosen, 
will fall short of Lord Tommy and the Honourable John ? 
No shadow of a reason. Were the intrinsic genius of the 
men exactly equal, there is no shadow of a reason : but rather 
there is quite the reverse ; for Tom and Jack have been at 
least workers all their days, not idlers, game-preservers and 
mere human clothes-horses, at any period of their lives; 
and have gained a schooling thereby, of which Lord Tommy 
and the Honourable John, unhappily strangers to it for 
most part, can form no conception ! Tom and Jack have 
already, on this most narrow hypothesis, a decided superiority 
of likelihood over Lord Tommy and the Honourable John. 

But the hypothesis is very narrow, and the fact is very 
wide; the hypothesis counts by units, the fact by millions. 
Consider how many Toms and Jacks there are to choose 
from, well or ill ! The aristocratic class from whom Members 
of Parliament can be elected extends only to certain thousands ; 
from these you are to choose your Secretary, if a seat in 
Parliament is the primary condition. But the general popu- 
lation is of Twenty-seven Millions ; from all sections of which 
you can choose, if the seat in Parliament is not to be primary. 
Make it ultimate instead of primary, a last investiture instead 



118 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

of a first indispensable condition, and the whole British 
Nation, learned, unlearned, professional, practical, speculative 
and miscellaneous, is at your disposal ! In the lowest broad 
strata of the population, equally as in the highest and 
narrowest, are produced men of every kind of genius ; man 
for man, your chance of genius is as good among the millions 
as among the units ; and class for class, what must it be ! 
From all classes, not from certain hundreds now but from 
several millions, whatsoever man the gods had gifted with 
intellect and nobleness, and power to help his country, could 
be chosen : O Heavens, could, if not by Tenpound Con- 
stituencies and the force of beer, then by a Reforming Premier 
with eyes in his head, who I think might do it quite infinitely 
better. Infinitely better. For ignobleness cannot, by the 
nature of it, choose the noble : no, there needs a seeing man 
who is himself noble, cognisant by internal experience of the 
symptoms of nobleness. Shall we never think of this ; shall 
we never more remember this, then ? It is forever true ; and 
Nature and Fact, however we may rattle our ballot-boxes, do 
at no time forget it. 

From the lowest and broadest stratum of Society, where 
the births are by the million, there was born, almost in 
our own memory, a Robert Burns ; son of one who ' had not 
capital for his poor moor-farm of Twenty Pounds a-year.' 
Robert Burns never had the smallest chance to get into 
Parliament, much as Robert Burns deserved, for all our sakes, 
to have been found there. For the man, it was not known 
to men purblind, sunk in their poor dim vulgar element, but 
might have been known to men of insight who had any 
loyalty or any royalty of their own, was a born king of 
men : full of valour, of intelligence and heroic nobleness ; fit 
for far other work than to break his heart among poor mean 
mortals, gauging beer ! Him no Tenpound Constituency 
chose, nor did any Reforming Premier : in the deep-sunk 
British Nation, overwhelmed in foggy stupor, with the load- 
stars all gone out for it, there was no whisper of a notion 



in.] DOWNING STREET 119 

that it could be desirable to choose him, except to come 
and dine with you, and in the interim to gauge. And yet 
heaven-born Mr. Pitt, at that period, was by no means 
without need of Heroic Intellect, for other purpos'es than 
gauging ! But sorrowful strangulation by redtape, much 
tighter then than it now is when so many revolutionary 
earthquakes have tussled it, quite tied up the meagre Pitt ; 
and he said, on hearing of this Burns and his sad hampered 
case, " Literature will take care of itself." " Yes, and of you 
too, if you don't mind it ! " answers one. 

And so, like Apollo taken for a Neatherd, and perhaps 
for none of the best on the Admetus establishment, this new 
Norse Thor had to put-up with what was going ; to gauge 
ale, and be thankful ; pouring his celestial sunlight through 
Scottish Song-writing, the narrowest chink ever offered to 
a Thundergod before ! And the meagre Pitt, and his 
Dundasses and redtape Phantasms (growing very ghastly now 
to think of), did not in the least know or understand, the 
impious, god-forgetting mortals, that Heroic Intellects, if 
Heaven were pleased to send such, were the one salvation for 
the world and for them and all of us. No ; they < had done 
very well without ' such ; did not see the use of such ; went 
along ' very well * without such ; well presided over by a 
singular Heroic Intellect called George the Third : and the 
Thundergod, as was rather fit of him, departed early, still in 
the noon of life, somewhat weary of gauging ale ! O Peter, 
what a scandalous torpid element of yellow London fog, 
favourable to owls only and their mousing operations, has 
blotted out the stars of Heaven for us these several genera- 
tions back, which, I rejoice to see, is now visibly about to 
take itself away again, or perhaps to be dispelled in a very 
tremendous manner ! 

For the sake of my Democratic friends, one other obsei- 
vation. Is not this Proposal the very essence of whatever 
truth there is in * Democracy ' ; this, that the able man be 



120 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

chosen, in whatever rank he is found ? That he be searched 
for as hidden treasure is ; be trained, supervised, set to the 
work which he alone is fit for. All Democracy lies in this ; 
this, I think, is worth all the ballot-boxes and suffrage-move- 
ments now going. Not that the noble soul, born poor, should 
be set to spout in Parliament, but that he should be set to 
assist in governing men : this is our grand Democratic in- 
terest. With this we can be saved ; without this, were there 
a Parliament spouting in every parish, and Hansard Debates 
to stem the Thames, we perish, <lie constitutionally drowned, 
in mere oceans of palaver. 

All reformers, constitutional persons, and men capable of 
reflection, are invited to reflect on these things. Let us 
brush the cobwebs from our eyes ; let us bid the inane 
traditions be silent for a moment; and ask ourselves, like 
men dreadfully intent on having it done, "By what method 
or methods can the able men from every rank of life be 
gathered, as diamond-grains from the general mass of sand : 
the able men, not the sham-able ; and set to do the work 
of governing, contriving, administering and guiding for us ! " 
It is the question of questions. All that Democracy ever 
meant lies there : the attainment of a truer and truer 
Aristocracy, or Government again by the Best. 

Reformed Parliaments have lamentably failed to attain it 
for us ; and I believe will and must forever fail. One true 
Reforming Statesman, one noble worshipper and knower of 
human intellect, with the quality of an experienced Politician 
too ; he, backed by such a Parliament as England, once 
recognising him, would loyally send, and at liberty to choose 
his working subalterns from all the Englishmen alive; he 
surely might do something? Something, by one means or 
another, is becoming fearfully necessary to be done ! He, I 
think, might accomplish more for us in ten years, than the 
best conceivable Reformed Parliament, and utmost extension 
of the suffrage, in twice or ten times ten. 

What is extremely important too, you could try this 



III.] DOWNING STREET 121 

method with safety ; extension of the suffrage you cannot so 
try. With even an approximately heroic Prime Minister, 
you could get nothing but good from prescribing to him 
thus, to choose the fittest man, under penalties ; to choose, 
not the fittest of the four or the three men that were in 
Parliament, but the fittest from the whole Twenty-seven 
Millions that he could hear of, at his peril. Nothing but 
good from this. From extension of the suffrage, some think, 
you might get quite other than good. From extension of the 
suffrage, till it became a universal counting of heads, one 
sees not in the least what wisdom could be extracted. A 
Parliament of the Paris pattern, such as we see just now, 
might be extracted : and from that ? Solution into universal 
slush ; drownage of all interests divine and human, in a 
NoahVDeluge of Parliamentary eloquence, such as we hope 
our sins, heavy and manifold though they are, have not yet 
quite deserved ! 



Who, then, is to be the Reforming Statesman, and begin 
the noble work for us ? He is the preliminary ; one such ; 
with him we may prosecute the enterprise to length after 
length ; without him we cannot stir in it at all. A true 
Icing, temporary-king, that dare undertake the government 
of Britain, on condition of beginning in sacred earnest to 
* reform ' it, not at this or that extremity, but at the heart 
and centre. That will expurgate Downing Street, and the 
practical Administration of our Affairs ; clear out its accumu- 
lated mountains of pedantries and cobwebs ; bid the Pedants 
and the Dullards depart, bid the Gifted and the Seeing enter 
and inhabit. So that henceforth there be Heavenly light 
there, instead of Stygian dusk ; that God's vivifying light 
instead of Satan's deadening and killing dusk, may radiate 
therefrom, and visit with healing all regions of this British 
Empire, which now writhes through every limb of it, in dire 
agony as if of death ! The enterprise is great, the enterprise 



122 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

may be called formidable and even awful ; but there is none 
nobler among the sublunary affairs of mankind just now. 
Nay, tacitly it is the enterprise of every man who undertakes 
to be British Premier in these times ; and I cannot esteem 
him an enviable Premier who, because the engagement is 
tacit, flatters himself that it does not exist ! " Show it me 
in the bond," he says. Your Lordship, it actually exists : 
and I think you will see it yet, in another kind of ' bond ' 
than that sheepskin one ! 

But truly, in any time, what a strange feeling, enough to 
alarm a very big Lordship, this : that he, of the size he is, 
has got to the apex of English affairs ! Smallest wrens, we 
know, by training and the aid of machinery, are capable of 
many things. For this world abounds in miraculous combi- 
nations, far transcending anything they do at Drury Lane in 
the melodramatic way. A world which, as solid as it looks, 
is made all of aerial and even of spiritual stuff; permeated 
all by incalculable sleeping forces and electricities ; and 
liable to go off, at any time, into the hugest developments, 
upon a scratch thoughtfully or thoughtlessly given on the 
right point : Nay, for every one of us, could not the sputter 
of a poor pistol-shot shrivel the Immensities together like a 
burnt scroll, and make the Heavens and the Earth pass away 
with a great noise ? Smallest wrens, and canary-birds of 
some dexterity, can be trained to handle lucifer-matches ; and 
have, before now, fired-off whole powder-magazines and parks 
of artillery. Perhaps without much astonishment to the 
canary-bird. The canary-bird can hold only its own quantity 
of astonishment ; and may possibly enough retain its presence 
of mind, were even Doomsday to come. It is on this 
principle that I explain to myself the equanimity of some 
men and Premiers whom we have known. 

This and the other Premier seems to take it with perfect 
coolness. And yet, I say, what a strange feeling, to find 
himself Chief Governor of England ; girding on, upon his 



in.] DOWNING STREET 

moderately-sized new soul, the old battle-harness of an 
Oliver Cromwell, an Edward Longshanks, a William Con- 
queror. " I, then, am the Ablest of English attainable 
Men ? This English People, which has spread itself over all 
lands and seas, and achieved such works hi the ages, which 
has done America, India, the Lancashire Cotton-trade, 
Bromwicham Iron- trade, Newton's Principia, Shakspeare's 
Dramas, and the British Constitution, the apex of all its 
intelligences and mighty instincts and dumb longings : it 
is I? William Conqueror's big gifts, and Edward's and 
Elizabeth's ; Oliver's lightning soul, noble as Sinai and the 
thunders of the Lord : these are mine, I begin to perceive, 
to a certain extent. These heroisms have I, though rather 
shy of exhibiting them. These ; and something withal of 
the huge beaver-faculty of our Arkwrights, Brindleys ; touches 
too of the phoenix-melodies and sunny heroisms of our 
Shakspeares, of our Singers, Sages and inspired Thinkers ; 
all this is in me, I will hope, though rather shy of 
exhibiting it on common occasions. The Pattern English- 
man, raised by solemn acclamation upon the bucklers of the 
English People, and saluted with universal ' God save THEE ! ' 
has now the honour to announce himself. After fifteen- 
hundred years of constitutional study as to methods of raising 
on the bucklers, which is the operation of operations, the 
English People, surely pretty well skilled in it by this time, 
has raised the remarkable individual now addressing you. 
The best-combined sample of whatsoever divine qualities are 
in this big People, the consummate flower of all that they 
have done and been, the ultimate product of the Destinies, 
and English man of men, arrived at last in the fulness of 
time, is who think you ? Ye worlds, the Ithuriel javelin 
by which, with all these heroisms and accumulated energies 
old and new, the English People means to smite and pierce, 
is this poor tailor's-bodkin, hardly adequate to bore an eylet- 

hole, who now has the honour to " Good Heavens, if 

it were not that men generally are very much of the canary- 



124 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

bird, here are reflections sufficient to annihilate any man, 
almost before starting ! 

But to us also it ought to be a very strange reflection ! 
This, then, is the length we have brought it to, with our 
constitutioning, and ballot-boxing, and incessant talk and 
effort in every kind for so many centuries back ; this ? The 
golden flower of our grand alchemical projection, which has 
set the world in astonishment so long, and been the envy of 
surrounding nations, is what we here see. To be governed 
by his Lordship, and guided through the undiscovered paths 
of Time by this respectable degree of human faculty. With 
our utmost soul's travail we could discover, by the sublimest 
methods eulogised by all the world, no abler Englishman 
than this? 

Really it should make us pause upon the said sublime 
methods, and ask ourselves very seriously, whether, notwith- 
standing the eulogy of all the world, they can be other than 
extremely astonishing methods, that require revisal and 
reconsideration very much indeed ! For the kind of ' man ' 
we get to govern us, all conclusions whatsoever centre there, 
and likewise all manner of issues flow infallibly therefrom. 
* Ask well, who is your Chief Governor,'* says one : * for around 
him men like to him will infallibly gather, and by degrees all 
the world will be made in his image.' * He who is himself 
a noble man, has a chance to know the nobleness of men ; 
he who is not, has none. And as for the poor Public, alas, 
is not the kind of " man " you set upon it the liveliest symbol 
of its and your veracity and victory and blessedness, or 
unveracity and misery and cursedness ; the general summation 
and practical outcome of all else whatsoever in the Public and 
in you ? ' 

Time was when an incompetent Governor could not be 
permitted among men. He was, and had to be, by one 
method or the other, clutched up from his place at the helm 
of affairs, and hurled down into the hold, perhaps even over- 
board, if he could not really steer. And we call those ages 



III.] DOWNING STREET 125 

barbarous, because they shuddered to see a Phantasm at the 
helm of their affairs ; an eyeless Pilot with constitutional 
spectacles, steering by the ear mainly ? And we have changed 
all that : no-government is now the best ; and a tailor's 
foreman, who gives no trouble, is preferable to any other for 
governing ? My friends, such truly is the current idea ; but 
you dreadfully mistake yourselves, and the fact is not such. 
The fact, now beginning to disclose itself again in distressed 
Needlewomen, famishing Connaughts, revolting Colonies, and 
a general rapid advance towards Social Ruin, remains really 
what it always was, and will so remain ! 

Men have very much forgotten it at present ; and only 
here a man and there a man begins again to bethink himself 
of it : but all men will gradually get reminded of it, perhaps 
terribly to their cost ; and the sooner they all lay it to heart 
again, I think it will be the better. For in spite of our 
oblivion of it, the thing remains forever true ; nor is there 
any Constitution or body of Constitutions, were they clothed 
with never such venerabilities and general acceptabilities, that 
avails to deliver a Nation from the consequences of forgetting 
it. Nature, I assure you, does forevermore remember it ; 
and a hundred British Constitutions are but as a hundred 
cobwebs between her and the penalty she levies for forgetting 
it. Tell me what kind of man governs a People, you tell me, 
with much exactness, what the net sum-total of social worth 
in that People has for some time been. Whether they have 
loved the phylacteries or the eternal noblenesses; whether 
they have been struggling heavenward like eagles, brothers 
of the radiances, or groping owl-like with horn-eyed diligence, 
catching mice and balances at their banker's, poor devils, 
you will see it all in that one fact. A fact long prepared 
beforehand ; which, if it is a peaceably received one, must 
have been acquiesced in, judged to be <best,' by the poor 
mousing owls, intent only to have a large balance at their 
banker's and keep a whole skin. 

Such sordid populations, which were long blind to Heaven's 



126 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. in. 

light, are getting themselves burnt-up rapidly, in these days, 
by street-insurrection and Hellfire ; as is indeed inevitable, 
my esteemed M'Croudy ! Light, accept the blessed light, 
if you will have it when Heaven vouchsafes. You refuse ? 
You prefer Delolme on the British Constitution, the Gospel 
according to M'Croudy, and a good balance at your banker's ? 
Very well : the * light ' is more and more withdrawn ; and for 
some time you have a general dusk, very favourable for 
catching mice; and the opulent owlery is very * happy,* and 
well-off at its banker's ; and furthermore, by due sequence, 
infallible as the foundations of the Universe and Nature's 
oldest law, the light returns on you, condensed, this time, 
into lightning, which there is not any skin whatever too 
thick for taking in ! 



No. IV 
THE NEW DOWNING STREET 

[IfiiH APRIL 1850] 

IN looking at this wreck of Governments in all European 
countries, there is one consideration that suggests itself, sadly 
elucidative of our modern epoch. These Governments, we 
may be well assured, have gone to anarchy for this one reason 
inclusive of every other whatsoever, That they were not wise 
enough ; that the spiritual talent embarked in them, the 
virtue, heroism, intellect, or by whatever other synonyms we 
designate it, was not adequate, probably had long been 
inadequate, and so in its dim helplessness had suffered, or 
perhaps invited falsity to introduce itself; had suffered 
injustices, and solecisms, and contradictions of the Divine 
Fact, to accumulate in more than tolerable measure ; where- 
upon said Governments were overset, and declared before all 
creatures to be too false. 

This is a reflection sad but important to the modern 
Governments now fallen anarchic, That they had not spiritual 
talent enough. And if this is so, then surely the question, 
How these Governments came to sink for want of intellect ? 
is a rather interesting one. Intellect, in some measure, is 
born into every Century ; and the Nineteenth flatters itself 
that it is rather distinguised that way ! What had become 
of this celebrated Nineteenth Century's intellect? Surely 
some of it existed, and was * developed ' withal ; nay, in the 
* undeveloped, 1 unconscious, or inarticulate state, it is not 
dead ; but alive and at work, if mutely not less beneficently, 
some think even more so ! And yet Governments, it would 
appear, could by no means get enough of it ; almost none of 

127 



128 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

it came their way ; what had become of it ? Truly there 
must be something very questionable, either in the intellect 
of this celebrated Century, or in the methods Governments 
now have of supplying their wants from the same. One or 
other of two grand fundamental shortcomings, in regard to 
intellect or human enlightenment, are very visible in this 
enlightened Century of ours ; for it has now become the most 
anarchic of Centuries ; that is to say, has fallen practically 
into such Egyptian darkness that it cannot grope its way at 
all! 

Nay, I rather think both of these shortcomings, fatal 
deficits both, are chargeable upon us ; and it is the joint 
harvest of both that we are now reaping, with such havoc to 
our affairs. I rather guess, the intellect of the Nineteenth 
Century, so full of miracle to Heavy side and others, is itself a 
mechanical or beaver intellect rather than a high or eminently 
human one. A dim and mean though authentic kind of 
intellect, this ; venerable only in defect of better. This kind 
will avail but little in the higher enterprises of human intel- 
lect, especially in that highest enterprise of guiding men 
Heavenward, which, after all, is the one real ' governing ' of 
them on this God's Earth : an enterprise not to be achieved 
by beaver intellect, but by other higher and highest kinds. 
This is deficit Jirst. And then secondly. Governments have, 
really to a fatal and extraordinary extent, neglected in late 
ages to supply themselves with what intellect was going ; 
having, as was too natural in the dim time, taken up a notion 
that human intellect, or even beaver intellect, was not necessary 
to them at all, but that a little of the vulpine sort (if attain- 
able), supported by routine, redtape traditions, and tolerable 
parliamentary eloquence on occasion, would very well suffice. 
A most false and impious notion ; leading to fatal lethargy 
on the part of Governments, while Nature and Fact were 
preparing strange phenomena in contradiction to it. 

These are two very fatal deficits ; the remedy of either of 
which would be the remedv of both, could we but find it ! 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 129 

For indeed they are vitally connected : one of them is sure to 
produce the other; and both once in action together, the 
advent of darkness, certain enough to issue in anarchy by and 
by, goes on with frightful acceleration. If Governments 
neglect to invite what noble intellect there is, then too surely 
all intellect, not omnipotent to resist bad influences, will tend 
to become beaverish ignoble intellect ; and quitting high 
aims, which seem shut-up from it, will help itself forward in 
the way of making money and suchlike ; or will even sink to 
be sham intellect : helping itself by methods which are not 
only beaverish but vulpine, and so * ignoble ' as not to have 
common honesty. The Government, taking no thought to 
choose intellect for itself, will gradually find that there is less 
and less of a good quality to choose from : thus, as in all 
impieties it does, bad grows worse at a frightful double rate of 
progression ; and your impiety is twice cursed. If you are 
impious enough to tolerate darkness, you will get ever more 
darkness to tolerate ; and at that inevitable stage of the 
account (inevitable in all such accounts) when actual light or 
else destruction is the alternative, you will call to the Heavens 
and the Earth for light, and none will come ! 

Certainly this evil, for one, has not 'wrought its own cure'; 
but has wrought precisely the reverse, and has been hourly 
eating away what possibilities of cure there were. And so, I 
fear, in spite of rumours to the contrary, it always is with 
evils, with solecisms against Nature, and contradictions to the 
divine fact of things : not an evil of them has ever wrought its 
own cure in my experience ; but has continually grown worse 
and wider and uglier, till some good (generally a good man) 
not able to endure the abomination longer, rose upon it and 
cured or else extinguished it. Evil Governments, divested of 
God's light because they have loved darkness rather, are not 
likelier than other evils to work their own cure out of that 
bad plight. 

It is urgent upon all Governments to pause in this fatal 
course ; persisted in, the goal is fearfully evident ; every hour's 

i 



130 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

persistence in it is making return more difficult. Intellect 
exists in all countries ; and the function appointed it by 
Heaven, Governments had better not attempt to contradict 
that, for they cannot ! Intellect has to govern in this world ; 
and will do it, if not in alliance with so-called * Governments ' 
of redtape and routine, then in divine hostility to such, and 
sometimes alas in diabolic hostility to such ; and in the end, 
as sure as Heaven is higher than Downing Street, and the 
Laws of Nature are tougher than redtape, with entire victory 
over them and entire ruin to them. If there is one thinking 
man among the Politicians of England, I consider these things 
extremely well worth his attention just now. 

Who are available to your Offices in Downing Street ? All 
the gifted souls, of every rank, who are born to you in this 
generation. These are appointed, by the true eternal * divine 
right ' which will never become obsolete, to be your governors 
and administrators ; and precisely as you employ them, or 
neglect to employ them, will your State be favoured of 
Heaven or disfavoured. This noble young soul, you can have 
him on either of two conditions ; and on one of them, since he 
is here in the world, you must have him. As your ally and 
coadjutor ; or failing that, as your natural enemy : which 
shall it be ? I consider that every Government convicts itself 
of infatuation and futility, or absolves and justifies itself 
before God and man, according as it answers this question. 
With all sublunary entities, this is the question of questions. 
What talent is born to you ? How do you employ that ? 
The crop of spiritual talent that is born to you, of human 
nobleness and intellect and heroic faculty, this is infinitely 
more important than your crops of cotton or corn, or wine or 
herrings or whale-oil, which the Newspapers record with such 
anxiety every season. This is not quite counted by seasons, 
therefore the Newspapers are silent : but by generations and 
centuries, I assure you it becomes amazingly sensible ; and 
surpasses, as Heaven does Earth, all the corn and wine, and 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 131 

whale-oil and California bullion, or any other crop you grow. 
If that crop cease, the other crops please to take them also, 
if you are anxious about them. That once ceasing, we may 
shut shop ; for no other crop whatever will stay with us, nor 
is worth having if it would. 

To promote men of talent, to search and sift the whole 
society in every class for men of talent, and joyfully promote 
them, has not always been found impossible. In many forms 
of polity they have done it, and still do it, to a certain degree. 
The degree to which they succeed in doing it marks, as I have 
said, with very great accuracy the degree of divine and human 
worth that is in them, the degree of success or real ultimate 
victory they can expect to have in this world. Think, for 
example, of the old Catholic Church, in its merely terrestrial 
relations to the State ; and see if your reflections, and con- 
trasts with what now is, are of an exulting character. Pro- 
gress of the species has gone on as with seven-league boots, 
and in various directions has shot ahead amazingly, with three 
cheers from all the world ; but in this direction, the most 
vital and indispensable, it has lagged terribly, and has even 
moved backward, till now it is quite gone out of sight in 
clouds of cotton-fuzz and railway-scrip, and has fallen fairly 
over the horizon to rearward ! 

In those most benighted Feudal societies, full of mere 
tyrannous steel Barons, and totally destitute of Tenpound 
Franchises and Ballot-boxes, there did nevertheless authenti- 
cally preach itself everywhere this grandest of gospels, without 
which no other gospel can avail us much, to all souls of men, 
" Awake, ye noble souls ; here is a noble career for you ! " I 
say, everywhere a road towards promotion, for human noble- 
ness, lay wide open to all men. The pious soul, which, if 
you reflect, will mean the ingenuous and ingenious, the gifted, 
intelligent and nobly-aspiring soul, such a soul, in whatever 
rank of life it were born, had one path inviting it ; a generous 
career, whereon, by human worth and valour, all earthly heights 



132 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

and Heaven itself were attainable. In the lowest stratum of 
social thraldom, nowhere was the noble soul doomed quite to 
choke, and die ignobly. The Church, poor old benighted 
creature, had at least taken care of that : the noble aspiring 
soul, not doomed to choke ignobly in its penuries, could at 
least run into the neighbouring Convent, and there take 
refuge. Education awaited it there ; strict training not only 
to whatever useful knowledge could be had from writing and 
reading, but to obedience, to pious reverence, self-restraint, 
annihilation of self, really to human nobleness in many most 
essential respects. No questions asked about your birth, 
genealogy, quantity of money-capital or the like; the one 
question was, " Is there some human nobleness in you, or is 
there not?" The poor neatherd's son, if he were a Noble 
of Nature, might rise to Priesthood, to High- priesthood, to 
the top of this world, and best of all, he had still high 
Heaven lying high enough above him, to keep his head 
steady, on whatever height or in whatever depth his way 
might lie ! 

A thrice-glorious arrangement, when I reflect on it ; most 
salutary to all high and low interests ; a truly human arrange- 
ment. You made the born noble yours, welcoming him as 
what he was, the Sent of Heaven : you did not force him 
either to die or become your enemy ; idly neglecting or 
suppressing him as what he was not, a thing of no worth. 
You accepted the blessed light ; and in the shape of infernal 
lightning it needed not to visit you. How, like an immense 
mine-shaft through the dim oppressed strata of society, this 
Institution of the Priesthood ran ; opening, from the lowest 
depths towards all heights and towards Heaven itself, a free 
road of egress and emergence towards virtuous nobleness, 
heroism and well-doing, for every born man. This we may 
call the living lungs and blood-circulation of those old 
Feudalisms. When I think of that immeasurable all- 
pervading lungs ; present in every corner of human society, 
every meanest hut a cell of said lungs ; inviting whatsoever 






IV.J THE NEW DOWNING STREET 133 

noble pious soul was born there to the path that was noble 
for him ; and leading thereby sometimes, if he were worthy, 
to be the Papa of Christendom, and Commander of all Kings, 
I perceive how the old Christian society continued healthy, 
vital, and was strong and heroic. When I contrast this with 
the noble aims now held out to noble souls born in remote 
huts, or beyond the verge of Palace- Yard ; and think of 
what your Lordship has done in the way of making priests 
and papas, I see a society without lungs, fast wheezing itself 
to death, in horrid convulsions ; and deserving to die. 

Over Europe generally in these years, I consider that the 
State has died, has fairly coughed its last in street musketry, 
and fallen down dead, incapable of any but galvanic life 
henceforth, owing to this same fatal want of lungs, which 
includes all other wants for a State. And furthermore that 
it will never come alive again, till it contrive to get such 
indispensable vital apparatus ; the outlook toward which 
consummation is very distant in most communities of Europe. 
If you let it come to death or suspended-animation in States, 
the case is very bad ! Vain to call-in universal-suffrage 
parliaments at that stage : the universal-suffrage parliaments 
cannot give you any breath of life, cannot find any wisdom 
for you ; by long impiety, you have let the supply of noble 
human wisdom die out ; and the wisdom that now courts 
your universal -suffrages is beggarly human attorneyism or 
sham-wisdom, which is not an insight into the Laws of 
God's Universe, but into the laws of hungry Egoism and 
the Devil's Chicane, and can in the end profit no community 
or man. 

No ; the kind of heroes that come mounted on the shoulders 
of the universal -suffrage, and instal themselves as Prime 
Ministers and healing Statesmen by force of able editorship, 
do not bid very fair to bring Nations back to the ways of 
God. Eloquent high -lacquered pinchbeck specimens these, 
expert in the arts of Belial mainly ; fitter to be markers at 



134 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

some exceedingly expensive billiard-table than sacred chief- 
priests of men ! * Greeks of the Lower Empire * ; with a 
varnish of parliamentary rhetoric ; and, I suppose, this other 
great gift, toughness of character, proof that they have 
persevered in their Master's service. Poor wretches, their 
industry is mob- worship, place- worship, parliamentary intrigue, 
and the multiplex art of tongue-fence : flung into that bad 
element, there they swim for decades long, throttling and 
wrestling one another according to their strength, and the 
toughest or luckiest gets to land, and becomes Premier. A 
more entirely unbeautiful class of Premiers was never raked 
out of the ooze, and set on high places, by any ingenuity of 
man. Dame Dubarry's petticoat was a better seine-net for 
fishing out Premiers than that. Let all Nations whom 
necessity is driving towards that method, take warning 
in time ! 

Alas, there is, in a manner, but one Nation that can still 
take warning ! In England alone of European Countries the 
State yet survives ; and might help itself by better methods. 
In England heroic wisdom is not yet dead, and quite replaced 
by attorneyism : the honest beaver faculty yet abounds with 
us, the heroic manful faculty shows itself also to the observant 
eye, not dead but dangerously sleeping. I said there were 
many kings in England : if these can yet be rallied into 
strenuous activity, and set to govern England in Downing 
Street and elsewhere, which their function always is, then 
England can be saved from anarchies and universal-suffrages ; 
and that Apotheosis of Attorneyism, blackest of terrestrial 
curses, may be spared us. If these cannot, the other issue, in 
such forms as may be appropriate to us, is inevitable. What 
escape is there ? England must conform to the eternal laws 
of life, or England too must die ! 

England with the largest mass of real living interests ever 
intrusted to a Nation ; and with a mass of extinct imaginary 
and quite dead interests piled upon it to the very Heavens, 
and encumbering it from shore to shore, does reel and 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 135 

stagger ominously in these years ; urged by the Divine 
Silences and the Eternal Laws to take practical hold of its 
living interests and manage them : and clutching blindly into 
its venerable extinct and imaginary interests, as if that were 
still the way to do it. England must contrive to manage its 
living interests, and quit its dead ones and their methods, or 
else depart from its place in this world. Surely England is 
called as no Nation ever was, to summon-out its kings, and 
set them to that high work ! Huge inorganic England, nigh 
choked under the exuviae of a thousand years, and blindly 
sprawling amid chartisms, ballot-boxes, prevenient graces, 
and bishops 1 nightmares, must, as the preliminary and com- 
mencement of organisation, learn to breathe again, get 
* lungs ' for herself again, as we defined it. That is imperative 
upon her: she too will die, otherwise, and cough her last 
upon the streets some day ; how can she continue living ? 
To enfranchise whatsoever of Wisdom is born in England, 
and set that to the sacred task of coercing and amending 
what of Folly is born in England : Heaven's blessing is 
purchasable by that ; by not that, only Heaven's curse is 
purchasable. The reform contemplated, my liberal friends 
perceive, is a truly radical one ; no ballot-box ever went so 
deep into the roots : a radical, most painful, slow and difficult, 
but most indispensable reform of reforms ! 

How short and feeble an approximation to these high 
ulterior results, the best Reform of Downing Street, presided 
over by the fittest Statesman one can imagine to exist at 
present, would be, is too apparent to me. A long time yet 
till we get our living interests put under due administration, 
till we get our dead interests handsomely dismissed. A long 
time yet till, by extensive change of habit and ways of 
thinking and acting, we get living ' lungs ' for ourselves ! 
Nevertheless, by Reform of Downing Street, we do begin 
to breathe; we do start in the way towards that and all 
high results. Nor is there visible to me any other way. 
Blessed enough were the way once entered on ; could we, in 



186 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

our evil days, but see the noble enterprise begun, and fairly 
in progress ! 

What the * New Downing Street' can grow to, and will 
and must if England is to have a Downing Street beyond 
a few years longer, it is far from me, in my remote watch- 
tower, to say with precision. A Downing Street inhabited 
by the gifted of the intellects of England ; directing all its 
energies upon the real and living interests of England, and 
silently but incessantly, in the alembics of the place, burning-up 
the extinct imaginary interests of England, that we may see 
God's sky a little plainer overhead, and have all of us a great 
accession of * heroic wisdom ' to dispose of : such a Downing 
Street to draw the plan of it, will require architects ; many 
successive architects and builders will be needed there. Let 
not editors, and remote unprofessional persons, interfere too 
much ! Change in the present edifice, however, radical 
change, all men can discern to be inevitable ; and even, if 
there shall not worse swiftly follow, to be imminent. Out- 
lines of the future edifice paint themselves against the sky (to 
men that still have a sky, and are above the miserable London 
fogs of the hour) ; noble elements of new State Architecture, 
foreshadows of a new Downing Street for the New Era that 
is to come. These with pious hope all men can see ; and it 
is good that all men, with whatever faculty they have, were 
earnestly looking thitherward ; trying to get above the fogs, 
that they might look thitherward ! 



Among practical men the idea prevails that Government 
can do nothing but * keep the peace.' They say all higher 
tasks are unsafe for it, impossible for it, and in fine not 
necessary for it or for us. On this footing a very feeble 
Downing Street might serve the turn ! I am well aware 
that Government, for a long time past, has taken in hand no 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 137 

other public task, and has professed to have no other, but 
that of keeping the peace. This public task, and the private 
one of ascertaining whether Dick or Jack was to do it, have 
amply filled the capabilities of Government for several genera- 
tions now. Hard tasks both, it would appear. In accomplishing 
the first, for example, have not heavenborn Chancellors of the 
Exchequer had to shear us very bare ; and to leave an over- 
plus of Debt, or of fleeces shorn before they are grown, justly 
esteemed among the wonders of the world ? Not a first-rate 
keeping of the peace, this, we begin to surmise ! At least 
it seems strange to us. 

For we, and the overwhelming majority of all our acquaint- 
ances, in this Parish and Nation and the adjacent Parishes 
and Nations, are profoundly conscious to ourselves of being 
by nature peaceable persons ; following our necessary in- 
dustries : without wish, interest or faintest intention to cut 
the skin of any mortal, to break feloniously into his industrial 
premises, or do any injustice to him at all. Because indeed, 
independent of Government, there is a thing called conscience, 
and we dare not. So that it cannot but appear to us, * the 
peace, 1 under dextrous management, might be very much more 
easily kept, your Lordship ; nay, we almost think, if well let 
alone, it would in a measure keep itself among such a set of 
persons ! And how it happens that when a poor hard- 
working creature of us has laboriously earned sixpence, the 
Government comes in, and (as some compute) says, " I will 
thank you for threepence of that, as per account, for getting 
you peace to spend the other threepence,"" our amazement 
begins to be considerable, and I think results will follow 
from it by and by. Not the most dextrous keeping of 
the peace, your Lordship, unless it be more difficult to do 
than appears ! 

Our domestic peace, we cannot but perceive, as good as 
keeps itself. Here and there a select Equitable person, 
appointed by the Public for that end, clad in ermine, and 
backed by certain companies of blue Police, is amply adequate, 



138 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

without immoderate outlay in money or otherwise, to keep- 
down the few exceptional individuals of the scoundrel kind; 
who, we observe, by the nature of them, are always weak and 
inconsiderable. And as to foreign peace, really all Europe, 
now especially with so many railroads, public journals, printed 
books, penny-post, bills of exchange, and continual inter- 
course and mutual dependence, is more and more becoming 
(so to speak) one Parish ; the Parishioners of which being, as 
we ourselves are, in immense majority peaceable hardworking 
people, could, if they were moderately well guided, have 
almost no disposition to quarrel. Their economic interests 
are one, ' To buy in the cheapest market, and sell in the 
dearest "" ; their faith, any religious faith they have, is one, 
* To annihilate shams by all methods, street -barricades 
included. 1 Why should they quarrel ? The Czar of Russia, 
in the Eastern parts of the Parish, may have other notions ; 
but he knows too well he must keep them to himself. He, 
if he meddled with the Western parts, and attempted any- 
where to crush or disturb that sacred Democratic Faith of 
theirs, is aware there would rise from a hundred and fifty 
million human throats such a Hymn of the Marseillaise as was 
never heard before ; and England, France, Germany, Poland, 
Hungary, and the Nine Kingdoms, hurling themselves upon 
him in never-imagined fire of vengeance, would swiftly reduce 
his Russia and him to a strange situation ! Wherefore he 
forbears, and being a person of some sense, will long forbear. 
In spite of editorial prophecy, the Czar of Russia does not 
disturb our night's rest. And with the other parts of the 
Parish our dreams and our thoughts are of anything but of 
fighting, or of the smallest need to fight. 

For keeping of the peace, a thing highly desirable to us, 
we strive to be grateful to your Lordship. Intelligible to us, 
also, your Lordship's reluctance to get out of the old routine. 
But we beg to say farther, that peace by itself has no feet 
to stand upon, and would not suit us even if it had. Keeping 
of the peace is the function of a policeman, and but a small 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 139 

fraction of that of any Government, King or Chief of men. 
Are not all men bound, and the Chief of men in the name 
of all, to do properly this : To see, so far as human effort 
under pain of eternal reprobation can, God's Kingdom 
incessantly advancing here below, and His will done on Earth 
as it is in Heaven ? On Sundays your Lordship knows this 
well ; forget it not on weekdays. I assure you it is for ever- 
more a fact. That is the immense divine and never-ending 
task which is laid on every man, and with unspeakable in- 
crease of emphasis on every Government or Commonwealth 
of men. Your Lordship, that is the basis upon which peace 
and all else depends ! That basis once well lost, there is no 
peace capable of being kept, the only peace that could then 
be kept is that of the churchyard. Your Lordship may 
depend on it, whatever thing takes upon it the name of 
Sovereign or Government in an English Nation such as this 
will have to get out of that old routine ; and set about 
keeping something very different from the peace, in these 
days ! 

Truly it is high time that same beautiful notion of No- 
Government should take itself away. The world is daily 
rushing towards wreck, while that lasts. If your Government 
is to be a Constituted Anarchy, what issue can it have ? 
Our one interest in such Government is, that it would be 
kind enough to cease and go its ways, before the inevitable 
arrive. The question, Who is to float atop nowhither upon 
the popular vortexes, and act that sorry character, f carcass of 
the drowned ass upon the mud-deluge ' ? is by no means an 
important one for almost anybody, hardly even for the 
drowned ass himself. Such drowned ass ought to ask himself, 
If the function is a sublime one ? For him too, though he 
looks sublime to the vulgar and floats atop, a private 
situation, down out of sight in his natural ooze, would be 
a luckier one. 

Crabbe, speaking of constitutional philosophies, faith in 



140 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

the ballot-box and suchlike, has this indignant passage : * If 
any voice of deliverance or resuscitation reach us, in this our 
low and ail-but lost estate, sunk almost beyond plummet's 
sounding in the mud of Lethe, and oblivious of all noble 
objects, it will be an intimation that we must put away all 
this abominable nonsense, and understand, once more, that 
Constituted Anarchy, with however many ballot-boxes, 
caucuses, and hustings-beerbarrels, is a continual offence to 
gods and men. That to be governed by small men is not 
only a misfortune, but it is a curse and a sin ; the effect, and 
alas the cause also, of all manner of curses and sins. That 
to profess subjection to phantasms, and pretend to accept 
guidance from fractional parts of tailors, is what Smelfungus 
in his rude dialect calls it, "a damned lie" and nothing 
other. A lie which, by long use and wont, we have grown 
accustomed to, and do not the least feel to be a lie, having 
spoken and done it continually everywhere for such a long 
time past ; but has Nature grown to accept it as a veracity, 
think you, my friend ? Have the Parcse fallen asleep, because 
you wanted to make money in the City? Nature at all 
moments knows well that it is a lie ; and that, like all lies, it 
is cursed and damned from the beginning. 

* Even so, ye indigent millionaires, and miserable bankrupt 
populations rolling in gold, whose note-of-hand will go to 
any length in Threadneedle Street, and to whom in Heaven's 
Bank the stern answer is, " No effects ! " Bankrupt, I say ; 
and Californias and Eldorados will not save us. And every 
time we speak such lie, or do it or look it, as we have been 
incessantly doing, and many of us with clear consciousness, 
for about a hundred and fifty years now, Nature marks down 
the exact penalty against us. " Debtor to so much lying : 
forfeiture of existing stock of worth to such extent; 
approach to general damnation by so much. 1 '' Till now, as 
we look round us over a convulsed anarchic Europe, and at 
home over an anarchy not yet convulsed, but only heaving 
towards convulsion, and to judge by the Mosaic sweating- 



iv.J THE NEW DOWNING STREET 141 

establishments, cannibal Connaughts and other symptoms, not 
far from convulsion now, we seem to have pretty much 
exhausted our accumulated stock of worth ; and, unless 
money's " worth " and bullion at the Bank will save us, to 
be rubbing very close upon that ulterior bourne which I do 
not like to name again ! 

* On behalf of nearly twenty-seven millions of my fellow- 
countrymen, sunk deep in Lethean sleep, with mere owl- 
dreams of Political Economy and mice-catching, in this pacific 
thrice-infernal slush-element ; and also of certain select 
thousands, and hundreds and units, awakened or beginning 
to awaken from it, and with horror in their hearts perceiving 
where they are, I beg to protest, and in the name of God to 
say, with poor human ink, desirous much that I had divine 
thunder to say it with, Awake, arise, before you sink to 
death eternal ! Unnameable destruction, and banishment to 
Houndsditch and Gehenna, lies in store for all Nations that, 
in angry perversity or brutal torpor and owlish blindness, 
neglect the eternal message of the gods, and vote for the 
Worse while the Better is there. Like owls they say, 
" Barabbas will do ; any orthodox Hebrew of the Hebrews, 
and peaceable believer in M'Croudy and the Faith of Leave- 
alone will do : the Right Honourable Minimus is well 
enough ; he shall be our Maximus, under him it will be 
handy to catch mice, and Owldom shall continue a flourishing 
empire." * 

One thing is undeniable, and must be continually repeated 
till it get to be understood again : Of all constitutions, forms 
of government, and political methods among men, the question 
to be asked is even this, What kind of man do you set over 
us ? All questions are answered in the answer to this. 
Another thing is worth attending to : No people or populace, 
with never such ballot-boxes, can select such man for you ; 
only the man of worth can recognise worth in men ; to the 
commonplace man of no or of little worth, you, unless you 



142 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

wish to be misled, need not apply on such an occasion. 
Those poor Tenpound Franchisers of yours, they are not even 
in earnest ; the poor sniffing sniggering Honourable Gentle- 
men they send to Parliament are as little so. Tenpound 
Franchisers full of mere beer and balderdash ; Honourable 
Gentlemen come to Parliament as to an Al mack's series of 
evening parties, or big cockmain (battle of all the cocks) 
very amusing to witness and bet upon : what can or could 
men in that predicament ever do for you ? Nay, if they were 
in life-and-death earnest, what could it avail you in such a 
case ? I tell you, a million blockheads looking authoritatively 
into one man of what you call genius, or noble sense, will 
make nothing but nonsense out of him and his qualities, and 
his virtues and defects, if they look till the end of time. 
He understands them, sees what they are; but that they 
should understand him, and see with rounded outline what 
his limits are, this, which would mean that they are 
bigger than he, is forever denied them. Their one good 
understanding of him is that they at last should loyally say, 
** We do not quite understand thee ; we perceive thee to be 
nobler and wiser and bigger than we, and will loyally follow 
thee." 

The question therefore arises, Whether, since reform of 
parliament and suchlike have done so little in that respect, 
the problem might not be with some hope attacked in the 
direct manner? Suppose all our Institutions, and Public 
Methods of Procedure, to continue for the present as they 
are ; and suppose farther a Reform Premier, and the English 
Nation once awakening under him to a due sense of the 
infinite importance, nay, the vital necessity there is of getting 
able and abler men : might not some heroic wisdom, and 
actual ' ability ' to do what must be done, prove discoverable 
to said Premier; and so the indispensable HeavenVblessing 
descend to us from above, since none has yet sprung from 
below? From above we shall have to try it; the other 
is exhausted, a hopeless method that ! The utmost passion 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 143 

of the house-inmates, ignorant of masonry and architecture, 
cannot avail to cure the house of smoke : not if they vote 
and agitate forever, and bestir themselves to the length 
even of street-barricades, will the smoke in the least abate : 
how can it? Their passion exercised in such ways, till 
Doomsday, will avail them nothing. Let their passion rage 
steadily against the existing majordomos to this effect, " Find 
us men skilled in house-building, acquainted with the laws 
of atmospheric suction, and capable to cure smoke " ; some- 
thing might come of it ! In the lucky circumstance of 
having one man of real intellect and courage to put at the 
head of the movement, much would come of it; a New 
Downing Street, fit for the British Nation and its bitter 
necessities in this New Era, would come ; and from that, in 
answer to continuous sacred fidelity and valiant toil, all good 
whatsoever would gradually come. 

Of the Continental nuisance called * Bureaucracy ,"* if this 
should alarm any reader, I can see no risk or possibility in 
England. Democracy is hot enough here, fierce enough ; it 
is perennial, universal, clearly invincible among us hence- 
forth. No danger it should let itself be flung in chains by 
sham-secretaries of the Pedant species, and accept their vile 
Age of Pinchbeck for its Golden Age ! Democracy clamours, 
with its Newspapers, its Parliaments, and all its Twenty-seven 
million throats, continually in this Nation forevermore. I 
remark, too, that the unconscious purport of all its clamours 
is even this, " Find us men skilled," make a New Downing 
Street, fit for the New Era ! 



Of the Foreign Office, in its reformed state, we have not 
much to say. Abolition of imaginary work, and replacement 
of it by real, is on all hands understood to be very urgent 
there. Large needless expenditures of money, immeasurable 
ditto of hypocrisy and grimace ; embassies, protocols, worlds 



144 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

of extinct traditions, empty pedantries, foul cobwebs : but 
we will by no means apply the ' live coal ' of our witty friend ; 
the Foreign Office will repent, and not be driven to suicide ! 
A truer time will come for the Continental Nations too : 
Authorities based on truth, and on the silent or spoken 
Worship of Human Nobleness, will again get themselves 
established there ; all Sham- Authorities, and consequent Real- 
Anarchies based on universal-suffrage and the Gospel according 
to George Sand, being put away ; and noble action, heroic 
new-developments of human faculty and industry, and blessed 
fruit as of Paradise getting itself conquered from the waste 
battle-field of the chaotic elements, will once more, there as 
here, begin to show themselves. 

When the Continental Nations have once got to the bottom 
of their Augean Stable, and begun to have real enterprises 
based on the eternal facts again, our Foreign Office may 
again have extensive concerns with them. And at all times, 
and even now, there will remain the question to be sincerely 
put and wisely answered, What essential concern has the 
British Nation with them and their enterprises ? Any concern 
at all, except that of handsomely keeping apart from them ? 
If so, what are the methods of best managing it ? At 
present, as was said, while Red Republic but clashes with foul 
Bureaucracy ; and Nations, sunk in blind ignavia, demand a 
universal-suffrage Parliament to heal their wretchedness ; and 
wild Anarchy and Phallus -Worship struggle with Sham- 
Kingship and extinct or galvanised Catholicism ; and in the 
Cave of the Winds all manner of rotten waifs and wrecks are 
hurled against each other, our English interest in the con- 
troversy, however huge said controversy grow, is quite trifling ; 
we have only in a handsome manner to say to it : " Tumble 
and rage along, ye rotten waifs and wrecks ; clash and collide 
as seems fittest to you ; and smite each other into annihila- 
tion at your own good pleasure. In that huge conflict, 
dismal but unavoidable, we, thanks to our heroic ancestors, 
having got so far ahead of you, have now no interest at 



IV.J THE NEW DOWNING STREET 145 

all. Our decided notion is, the dead ought to bury their 
dead in such a case : and so we have the honour to be, 
with distinguished consideration, your entirely devoted, 
FLIMNAP, SEC. FOREIGN DEPARTMENT." I really think FJimnap, 
till truer times come, ought to treat much of his work in 
this way : cautious to give offence to his neighbours ; resolute 
not to concern himself in any of their self-annihilating 
operations whatsoever. 

Foreign wars are sometimes unavoidable. We ourselves, 
in the course of natural merchandising and laudable business, 
have now and then got into ambiguous situations ; into 
quarrels which needed to be settled, and without fighting 
would not settle. Sugar Islands, Spice Islands, Indias, 
Canadas, these, by the real decree of Heaven, were ours ; 
and nobody would or could believe it, till it was tried by 
cannon law, and so proved. Such cases happen. In former 
times especially, owing very much to want of intercourse and 
to the consequent mutual ignorance, there did occur mis- 
understandings : and therefrom many foreign wars, some of 
them by no means unnecessary. With China, or some distant 
country, too unintelligent of us and too unintelligible to 
us, there still sometimes rises necessary occasion for a war. 
Nevertheless wars, misunderstandings that get to the length 
of arguing themselves out by sword and cannon, have, in 
these late generations of improved intercourse, been palpably 
becoming less and less necessary ; have in a manner become 
superfluous, if we had a little wisdom, and our Foreign Office 
on a good footing. 

Of European wars I really hardly remember any, since 
Oliver Cromwell's last Protestant or Liberation war with 
Popish antichristian Spain some two hundred years ago, to 
which I for my own part could have contributed my life with 
any heartiness, or in fact would have subscribed money itself 
to any considerable amount. Dutch William, a man of some 
heroism, did indeed get into troubles with Louis Fourteenth ; 



146 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

and there rested till some shadow of Protestant Interest, and 
question of National and individual Independence, over those 
wide controversies ; a little money and human enthusiasm 
was still due to Dutch William. Illustrious Chatham also, 
not to speak of his Manilla ransoms and the like, did one 
thing : assisted Fritz of Prussia, a brave man and king 
(almost the only sovereign King I have known since Crom- 
well's time) like to be borne down by ignoble men and 
sham-kings ; for this let illustrious Chatham too have a little 
money and human enthusiasm, a little, by no means much. 
But what am I to say of heavenborn Pitt the son of Chatham ? 
England sent forth her fleets and armies ; her money into 
every country; money as if the heavenborn Chancellor had 
got a Fortunatus 1 purse; as if this Island had become a 
volcanic fountain of gold, or new terrestrial sun capable of 
radiating mere guineas. The result of all which, what was 
it? Elderly men can remember the tar-barrels burnt for 
success and thrice-immortal victory in the business ; and yet 
what result had we ? The French Revolution, a Fact decreed 
in the Eternal Councils, could not be put down : the result 
was, that heavenborn Pitt had actually been fighting (as the 
old Hebrews would have said) against the Lord, that the 
Laws of Nature were stronger than Pitt. Of whom therefore 
there remains chiefly his unaccountable radiation of guineas, 
for the gratitude of posterity. Thank you for nothing, 
for eight hundred millions less than nothing ! 

Our War Offices, Admiralties, and other Fighting Establish- 
ments, are forcing themselves on everybody's attention at this 
time. Bull grumbles audibly : " The money you have cost 
me these five-and-thirty years, during which you have stood 
elaborately ready to fight at any moment, without at any 
moment being called to fight, is surely an astonishing sum. 
The National Debt itself might have been half paid by that 
money, which has all gone in pipeclay and blank cartridges ! " 
Yes, Mr. Bull, the money can be counted in hundreds of 



iv.J THE NEW DOWNING STREET 147 

millions, which certainly is something : but the * strenuously 
organised idleness,* and what mischief that amounts to have 
you computed it ? A perpetual solecism, and blasphemy (of 
its sort), set to march openly among us, dressed in scarlet ! 
Bull, with a more and more sulky tone, demands that such 
solecism be abated ; that these lighting Establishments be 
as it were disbanded, and set to do some work in the Creation, 
since fighting there is now none for them. This demand is 
irrefragably just, is growing urgent too ; and yet this demand 
cannot be complied with, not yet while the State grounds 
itself on unrealities, and Downing Street continues what it is. 

The old Romans made their soldiers work during intervals 
of war. The New Downing Street too, we may predict, will 
have less and less tolerance for idleness on the part of soldiers 
or others. Nay, the New Downing Street, I foresee, when 
once it has got its * Industrial Regiments ' organised, will 
make these mainly do its fighting, what fighting there is ; 
and so save immense sums. Or indeed, all citizens of the 
Commonwealth, as is the right and the interest of every free 
man in this world, will have themselves trained to arms ; each 
citizen ready to defend his country with his own body and 
soul, he is not worthy to have a country otherwise. In a 
State grounded on veracities, that would be the rule. Downing 
Street, if it cannot bethink itself of returning to the veracities, 
will have to vanish altogether ! 

To fight with its neighbours never was, and is now less 
than ever, the real trade of England. For far other objects 
was the English People created into this world ; sent down 
from the Eternities, to mark with its history certain spaces in 
the current of sublunary Time ! Essential too that the 
English People should discover what its real objects are ; and 
resolutely follow these, resolutely refusing to follow other 
than these. The State will have victory so far as it can do 
that ; so far as it cannot, defeat. 

In the New Downing Street, discerning what its real 
functions are, and with sacred abhorrence putting away from 



148 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

it what its functions are not, w can fancy changes enough in 
Foreign Office, War Office, Colonial Office, Home Office! 
Our War-soldiers Industrial, first of all ; doing nobler than 
Roman works, when fighting is not wanted of them. Seventy- 
fours not hanging idly by their anchors in the Tagus, or off 
Sapienza (one of the saddest sights under the sun), but busy, 
every Seventy-four of them, carrying-over streams of British 
Industrials to the immeasurable Britain that lies beyond the 
sea in every zone of the world. A State grounding itself on 
the veracities, not on the semblances and the injustices : 
every citizen a soldier for it. Here would be new real 
Secretaryships and Ministries, not for foreign war and dip- 
lomacy, but for domestic peace and utility. Minister of 
Works ; Minister of Justice, clearing his Model-Prisons of 
their scoundrelism ; shipping his scoundrels wholly abroad, 
under hard and just drill-sergeants (hundreds of such stand 
wistfully ready for you, these thirty years, in the Rag-and- 
Famish Club and elsewhere !) into fertile desert countries ; to 
make railways, one big railway (says the Major 1 ) quite 
across America ; fit to employ all the able-bodied Scoundrels 
and efficient Half-pay Officers in Nature ! 

Lastly, or rather firstly, and as the preliminary of all, 
would there not be a Minister of Education ? Minister 
charged to get this English People taught a little, at his and 
our peril ! Minister of Education ; no longer dolefully em- 
bayed amid the wreck of moribund * religions,' but clear 
ahead of all that ; steering, free and piously fearless, towards 

Aw divine goal under the eternal stars ! O Heaven, and 

are these things forever impossible, then? Not a whit. 
Tomorrow morning they might all begin to be, and go on 
through blessed centuries realising themselves, if it were not 
that alas, if it were not that we are most of us insincere 
persons, sham talking-machines and hollow windy fools ! 
Which it is not ( impossible n that we should cease to be, I 
hope? 

1 Major Cannichael Smith : see his Pamphlets on this subject 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 149 

Constitutions for the Colonies are now on the anvil ; the 
discontented Colonies are all to be cured of their miseries by 
Constitutions. Whether that will cure their miseries, or only 
operate as a GodfreyVcordial to stop their whimpering, and 
in the end worsen all their miseries, may be a sad doubt to 
us. One thing strikes a remote spectator in these Colonial 
questions : the singular placidity with which the British 
Statesman at this time, backed by M'Croudy and the British 
moneyed classes, is prepared to surrender whatsoever interest 
Britain, as foundress of those establishments, might pretend 
to have in the decision. " If you want to go from us, go ; 
we by no means want you to stay : you cost us money yearly, 
which is scarce ; desperate quantities of trouble too : why 
not go, if you wish it ? " Such is the humour of the British 
Statesman, at this time. Men clear for rebellion, * annexa- 
tion' as they call it, walk openly abroad in our American 
Colonies ; found newspapers, hold platform palaverings. From 
Canada there comes duly by each mail a regular statistic of 
Annexationism : increasing fast in this quarter, diminishing 
in that ; Majesty's Chief Governor seeming to take it as a 
perfectly open question ; Majesty's Chief Governor in fact 
seldom appearing on the scene at all, except to receive the 
impact of a few rotten eggs on occasion, and then duck in 
again to his private contemplations. And yet one would 
think the Majesty's Chief Governor ought to have a kind of 
interest in the thing ? Public liberty is carried to a great 
length in some portions of her Majesty's dominions. But 
the question, " Are we to continue subjects of her Majesty, 
or start rebelling against her ? So many as are for rebelling, 
hold up your hands ! " Here is a public discussion of a very 
extraordinary nature to be going on under the nose of a 
Governor of Canada. How the Governor of Canada, being 
a British piece of flesh and blood, and not a Canadian lumber- 
log of mere pine and rosin, can stand it, is not very con- 
ceivable at first view. He does it, seemingly, with the 
stoicism of a Zeno. It is a constitutional sight like few. 



150 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

And yet an instinct deeper than the Gospel of M'Croudy 
teaches all men that Colonies are worth something to a 
country ! That if, under the present Colonial Office, they 
are a vexation to us and themselves, some other Colonial 
Office can and must be contrived which shall render them a 
blessing; and that the remedy will be to contrive such a 
Colonial Office or method of administration, and by no means 
to cut the Colonies loose. Colonies are not to be picked off 
the street every day ; not a Colony of them but has been 
bought dear, well purchased by the toil and blood of those 
we have the honour to be sons of ; and we cannot just afford 
to cut them away because M'Croudy finds the present manage- 
ment of them cost money. The present management will 
indeed require to be cut away ; but as for the Colonies, we 
purpose through Heaven's blessing to retain them a while 
yet ! Shame on us for unworthy sons of brave fathers if we 
do not. Brave fathers, by valiant blood and sweat, purchased 
for us, from the bounty of Heaven, rich possessions in all 
zones ; and we, wretched imbeciles, cannot do the function of 
administering them ? And because the accounts do not 
stand well in the ledger, our remedy is, not to take shame to 
ourselves, and repent in sackcloth and ashes, and amend our 
beggarly imbecilities and insincerities in that as in other 
departments of our business, but to fling the business over- 
board, and declare the business itself to be bad ? We are 
a hopeful set of heirs to a big fortune ! It does not suit our 
Manton gunneries, grouse-shootings, mousings in the City ; 
and like spirited young gentlemen we will give it up, and let 
the attorneys take it ? 

Is there no value, then, in human things, but what can 
write itself down in the cash-ledger ? All men know, and 
even M'Croudy in his inarticulate heart knows, that to men 
and Nations there are invaluable values which cannot be sold 
for money at all. George Robins is great ; but he is not 
omnipotent. George Robins cannot quite sell Heaven and 
Earth by auction, excellent though he be at the business. 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 151 

Nay, if M'Croudy offered his own life for sale in Thread- 
needle Street, would anybody buy it ? Not I, for one. 
" Nobody bids : pass on to the next lot," answers Robins. 
And yet to M'Croudy this unsaleable lot is worth all the 
Universe : nay, I believe, to us also it is worth something ; 
good monitions, as to several things, do lie in this Professor 
of the dismal science ; and considerable sums even of money, 
not to speak of other benefit, will yet come out of his life 
and him, for which nobody bids ! Robins has his own field 
where he reigns triumphant ; but to that we will restrict 
him with iron limits ; and neither Colonies nor the lives of 
Professors, nor other such invaluable objects shall come under 
his hammer. 

Bad state of the ledger will demonstrate that your way of 
dealing with your Colonies is absurd, and urgently in want of 
reform ; but to demonstrate that the Empire itself must be 
dismembered to bring the ledger straight ? O never. Some- 
thing else than the ledger must intervene to do that. Why 
does not England repudiate Ireland, and insist on the * Repeal,"* 
instead of prohibiting it under death-penalties ? Ireland 
has never been a paying speculation yet, nor is it like soon 
to be ! Why does not Middlesex repudiate Surrey, and 
Chelsea Kensington, and each county and each parish, and in 
the end each individual set up for himself and his cashbox, 
repudiating the other and his, because their mutual interests 
have got into an irritating course ? They must change the 
course, seek till they discover a soothing one ; that is the 
remedy, when limbs of the same body come to irritate one 
another. Because the paltry tatter of a garment, reticulated 
for you out of thrums and listings in Downing Street, ties 
foot and hand together in an intolerable manner, will you 
relieve yourself by cutting off the hand or the foot ? You 
will cut off the paltry tatter of a pretended bodycoat, I think, 
and fling that to the nettles ; and imperatively require one 
that fits your size better. 

Miserabler theory than that of money on the ledger being 



152 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

the primary rule for Empires, or for any higher entity than 
City owls and their mice-catching, cannot well be propounded. 
And I would by no means advise Felicissimus, ill at ease on 
his high-trotting and now justly impatient Sleswicker, to let 
the poor horse in its desperation go in that direction for a 
momentary solace. If by lumber-log Governors, by GodfreyV 
cordial Constitutions or otherwise, he contrive to cut off the 
Colonies or any real right the big British Empire has in her 
Colonies, both he and the British Empire will bitterly repent 
it one day ! The Sleswicker, relieved in ledger for a moment, 
will find that it is wounded in heart and honour forever ; and 
the turning of its wild forehoofs upon Felicissimus as he lies 
in the ditch combed off, is not a thing I like to think of ! 
Britain, whether it be known to Felicissimus or not, has other 
tasks appointed her in God's Universe than the making of 
money ; and woe will betide her if she forget those other 
withal. Tasks, colonial and domestic, which are of an 
eternally divine nature, and compared with which all money, 
and all that is procurable by money, are in strict arithmetic 
an imponderable quantity, have been assigned this Nation ; 
and they also at last are coming upon her again, clamorous, 
abstruse, inevitable, much to her bewilderment just now ! 

This poor Nation, painfully dark about said tasks and the 
way of doing them, means to keep its Colonies nevertheless, 
as things which somehow or other must have a value, were it 
better seen into. They are portions of the general Earth, 
where the children of Britain now dwell ; where the gods 
have so far sanctioned their endeavour, as to say that they 
have a right to dwell. England will not readily admit that 
her own children are worth nothing but to be flung out of 
doors ! England looking on her Colonies can say : " Here 
are lands and seas, spice-lands, corn-lands, timber-lands, over- 
arched by zodiacs and stars, clasped by many-sounding seas ; 
wide spaces of the Maker's building, fit for the cradle yet of 
mighty Nations and their Sciences and Heroisms. Fertile 
continents still inhabited by wild beasts are mine, into which 



IV.J THE NEW DOWNING STREET 153 

all the distressed populations of Europe might pour themselves, 
and make at once an Old World and a New World human. 
By the eternal fiat of the gods, this must yet one day be ; 
this, by all the Divine Silences that rule this Universe, silent 
to fools, eloquent and awful to the hearts of the wise, is 
incessantly at this moment, and at all moments, commanded 
to begin to be. Unspeakable deliverance, and new destiny 
of thousandfold expanded manfulness for all men, dawns out 
of the Future here. To me has fallen the godlike task of 
initiating all that : of me and of my Colonies, the abstruse 
Future asks, Are you wise enough for so sublime a destiny ? 
Are you too foolish ? " 

That you ask advice of whatever wisdom is to be had in 
the Colony, and even take note of what wwwisdom is in it, 
and record that too as an existing fact, will certainly be very 
advantageous. But I suspect the kind of Parliament that will 
suit a Colony is much of a secret just now ! Mr. Wakefield, 
a democratic man in all fibres of him, and acquainted with 
Colonial Socialities as few are, judges that the franchise for 
your Colonial Parliament should be decidedly select, and 
advises a high money-qualification ; as there is in all Colonies 
a fluctuating migratory mass, not destitute of money, but 
very much so of loyalty, permanency, or civic availability ; 
whom it is extremely advantageous not to consult on what 
you are about attempting for the Colony or Mother Country. 
This I can well believe ; and also that a ' high money- 
qualification, 1 in the present sad state of human affairs, might 
be some help to you in selecting ; though whether even that 
would quite certainly bring * wisdom,' the one thing indispens- 
able, is much a question with me. It might help, it might 
help ! And if by any means you could (which you cannot) 
exclude the Fourth Estate, and indicate decisively that Wise 
Advice was the thing wanted here, and Parliamentary 
Eloquence was not the thing wanted anywhere just now, 
there might really some light of experience and human 



154 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

foresight, and a truly valuable benefit, be found for you in 
such assemblies. 

And there is one thing, too apt to be forgotten, which it 
much behoves us to remember : In the Colonies, as everywhere 
else in this world, the vital point is not who decides, but 
what is decided on ! That measures tending really to the 
best advantage temporal and spiritual of the Colony be 
adopted, and strenuously put in execution ; there lies the 
grand interest of every good citizen British and Colonial. 
Such measures, whosoever have originated and prescribed 
them, will gradually be sanctioned by all men and gods ; and 
clamours of every kind in reference to them may safely to a 
great extent be neglected, as clamorous merely, and sure to 
be transient. Colonial Governor, Colonial Parliament, who- 
ever or whatever does an injustice, or resolves on an wnwisdom, 
he is the pernicious object, however parliamentary he be ! 

I have known things done, in this or the other Colony, in 
the most parliamentary way before now, which carried written 
on the brow of them sad symptoms of eternal reprobation ; 
not to be mistaken, had you painted an inch thick. In 
Montreal, for example, at this moment, standing amid the 
ruins of the * Elgin Marbles ' (as they call the burnt walls of 
the Parliament House there), what rational British soul but 
is forced to institute the mournfulest constitutional reflections ? 
Some years ago the Canadas, probably not without materials 
for discontent, and blown upon by skilful artists, blazed up 
into crackling of musketry, open flame of rebellion ; a thing 
smacking of the gallows in all countries that pretend to have 
any * Government. 1 Which flame of rebellion, had there been 
no loyal population to fling themselves upon it at peril of 
their life, might have ended we know not how. It ended 
speedily, in the good way ; Canada got a GodfreyVcordial 
Constitution ; and for the moment all was varnished into 
some kind of feasibility again. A most poor feasibility; 
momentary, not lasting, nor like to be of profit to Canada ! 
For this year, the Canadian most constitutional Parliament, 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 155 

such a congeries of persons as one can imagine, decides that 
the aforesaid flame of rebellion shall not only be forgotten as 
per bargain, but that the loyal population, who flung their 
lives upon it and quenched it in the nick of time, shall pay 
the rebels their damages ! Of this, I believe, on sadly con- 
clusive evidence, there is no doubt whatever. Such, when 
you wash off the constitutional pigments, is the Death's-head 
that discloses itself. I can only say, if all the Parliaments in 
the world were to vote that such a thing was just, I should 
feel painfully constrained to answer, at my peril, " No, by the 
Eternal, never ! " And I would recommend any British 
Governor who might come across that Business, there or here, 
to overhaul it again. What the meaning of a Governor, if 
he is not to overhaul and control such things, may be, I 
cannot conjecture. A Canadian Lumber-log may as well be 
made Governor. He might have some cast-metal hand or 
shoulder-crank (a thing easily contrivable in Birmingham) 
for signing his name to Acts of the Colonial Parliament ; he 
would be a * native of the country ' too, with popularity on 
that score if on no other ; he is your man, if you really want 
a Log Governor ! 

I perceive therefore that, besides choosing Parliaments 
never so well, the New Colonial Office will have another thing 
to do : Contrive to send out a new kind of Governors to the 
Colonies. This will be the mainspring of the business ; 
without this the business will not go at all. An experienced, 
wise and valiant British man, to represent the Imperial 
Interest ; he, with such a speaking or silent Collective Wisdom 
as he can gather round him in the Colony, will evidently be 
the condition of all good between the Mother Country and 
it. If you can find such a man, your point is gained ; if 
you cannot, lost. By him and his Collective Wisdom all 
manner of true relations, mutual interests and duties such as 
they do exist in fact between Mother Country and Colony, 
can be gradually developed into practical methods and results ; 



156 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

and all manner of true and noble successes, and veracities in 
the way of governing, be won. Choose well your Governor ; 
not from this or that poor section of the Aristocracy, 
military, naval, or redtapist ; wherever there are born kings 
of men, you had better seek them out, and breed them to 
this work. All sections of the British Population will be 
open to you : and, on the whole, you must succeed in finding 
a man Jit. And having found him, I would farther recom- 
mend you to keep him some time ! It would be a great 
improvement to end this present nomadism of Colonial 
Governors. Give your Governor due power ; and let him 
know withal that he is wedded to his enterprise, and having 
once well learned it, shall continue with it ; that it is not a 
Canadian Lumber-Log you want there, to tumble upon the 
vortexes and sign its name by a Birmingham shoulder-crank, 
but a Governor of Men; who, you mean, shall fairly gird 
himself to his enterprise, and fail with it and conquer with it, 
and as it were live and die with it : he will have much to 
learn ; and having once learned it, will stay, and turn his 
knowledge to account. 

From this kind of Governor, were you once in the way of 
finding him with moderate certainty, from him and his Col- 
lective Wisdom, all good whatsoever might be anticipated. 
And surely, were the Colonies once enfranchised from redtape, 
and the poor Mother Country once enfranchised from it ; were 
our idle Seventy-fours all busy carrying-out streams of British 
Industrials, and those Scoundrel Regiments all working, under 
divine drill-sergeants at the grand Atlantic and Pacific Junc- 
tion Railway, poor Britain and her poor Colonies might find 
that they had true relations to each other : that the Imperial 
Mother and her constitutionally obedient Daughters was not a 
redtape fiction, provoking bitter mockery as at present, but a 
blessed God's-Fact destined to fill half the world with its fruits 
one day ! 

But undoubtedly our grand primary concern is the Home 



iv.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 157 

Office, and its Irish Giant named of Despair. When the 
Home Office begins dealing with this Irish Giant, which it 
is vitally urgent for us the Home Office should straightway 
do, it will find its duties enlarged to a most unexpected 
extent, and, as it were, altered from top to bottom. A 
changed time now when the question is, What to do with 
three millions of paupers (come upon you for food, since you 
have no work for them) increasing at a frightful rate per 
day ? Home Office, Parliament, King, Constitution will find 
that they have now, if they will continue in this world long, 
got a quite immense new question and continually-recurring 
set of questions. That huge question of the Irish Giant, 
with his Scotch and English Giant-Progeny advancing open- 
mouthed upon us, will, as I calculate, change from top to 
bottom not the Home Office only but all manner of Offices 
and Institutions whatsoever, and gradually the structure of 
Society itself. I perceive, it will make us a new Society, if we 
are to continue a Society at all. For the alternative is not, 
Stay where we are, or change ? But Change, with new wise 
effort fit for the new time, to true and wider nobler National 
Life ; or Change, by indolent folding of the arms, as we are 
now doing, in horrible anarchies and convulsions to Dissolu- 
tion, to National Death, or Suspended-animation ? Suspended- 
animation itself is a frightful possibility for Britain : this 
Anarchy whither all Europe has preceded us, where all 
Europe is now weltering, would suit us as ill as any ! The 
question for the British Nation is : Can we work our course 
pacifically, on firm land, into the New Era ; or must it be, 
for us too, as for all the others, through black abysses of 
Anarchy, hardly escaping, if we do with all our struggles 
escape, the jaws of eternal Death ? 

For Pauperism, though it now absorbs its high figure of 
millions annually, is by no means a question of money only, 
but of infinitely higher and greater than all conceivable money. 
If our Chancellor of the Exchequer had a Fortunatus 1 purse, 
and miraculous sacks of Indian meal that would stand scoop- 



158 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

ing from forever, I say, even on these terms Pauperism 
could not be endured ; and it would vitally concern all 
British Citizens to abate Pauperism, and never rest till they 
had ended it again. Pauperism is the general leakage 
through every joint of the ship that is rotten. Were all 
men doing their duty, or even seriously trying to do it, there 
would be no Pauper. Were the pretended Captains of the 
world at all in the habit of commanding ; were the pretended 
Teachers of the world at all in the habit of teaching, of 
admonishing said Captains among others, and with sacred 
zeal apprising them to what place such neglect was leading, 
how could Pauperism exist ? Pauperism would lie far over 
the horizon ; we should be lamenting and denouncing quite 
inferior sins of men, which were only tending afar off towards 
Pauperism. A true Captaincy; a true Teachership, either 
making all men and Captains know and devoutly recognise 
the eternal law of things, or else breaking its own heart, and 
going about with sackcloth round its loins, in testimony of 
continual sorrow and protest, and prophecy of God's venge- 
ance upon such a course of things : either of these divine 
equipments would have saved us ; and it is because we have 
neither of them that we are come to such a pass ! 

We may depend upon it, where there is a Pauper, there is 
a sin ; to make one Pauper there go many sins. Pauperism is 
our Social Sin grown manifest ; developed from the state of a 
spiritual ignobleness, a practical impropriety and base oblivion 
of duty, to an affair of the ledger. Here is not now an un- 
heeded sin against God ; here is a concrete ugly hulk of 
Beggary demanding that you should buy Indian meal for it. 
Men of reflection have long looked with a horror for which 
there was no response in the idle public, upon Pauperism ; 
but the quantity of meal it demands has now awakened men 
of no reflection to consider it. Pauperism is the poisonous 
dripping from all the sins, and putrid unveracities and god- 
forgetting greedinesses and devil-serving cants and Jesuitisms, 
that exist among us. Not one idle Sham lounging about 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 159 

Creation upon false pretences, upon means which he has not 
earned, upon theories which he does not practise, but yields 
his share of Pauperism somewhere or other. His sham-work 
oozes down ; finds at last its issue as human Pauperism, in 
a human being that by those false pretences cannot live. The 
Idle Workhouse, now about to burst of overfilling, what is it 
but the scandalous poison-tank of drainage from the universal 
Stygian quagmire of our affairs ? Workhouse Paupers ; 
immortal sons of Adam rotted into that scandalous condition, 
subter-slavish, demanding that you would make slaves of them 
as an unattainable blessing ! My friends, I perceive the quag- 
mire must be drained, or we cannot live. And further, I 
perceive, this of Pauperism is the corner where we must begin, 
the levels all pointing thitherward, the possibilities lying 
all clearly there. On that Problem we shall find that innumer- 
able things, that all things whatsoever hang. By courageous 
steadfast persistence in that, I can foresee Society itself 
regenerated. In the course of long strenuous centuries, I 
can see the State become what it is actually bound to be, the 
keystone of a most real * Organisation of Labour," 1 and on 
this Earth a world of some veracity, and some heroism, 
once more worth living in ! 

The State in all European countries, and in England first 
of all, as I hope, will discover that its functions are now, and 
have long been, very wide of what the State in old pedant 
Downing Streets has aimed at ; that the State is, for the 
present, not a reality but in great part a dramatic speciosity, 
expending its strength in practices and objects fallen many of 
them quite obsolete ; that it must come a little nearer the 
true aim again, or it cannot continue in this world. The 
* Champion of England ' cased in iron or tin, and * able to 
mount his horse with little assistance,' this Champion and 
the thousandfold cousinry of Phantasms he has, nearly all dead 
now but still walking as ghosts, must positively take himself 
away : who can endure him, and his solemn trumpetings and 



160 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

obsolete gesticulations, in a Time that is full of deadly reali- 
ties, coming open-mouthed upon us ? At Drury Lane let 
him play his part, him and his thousandfold cousinry ; and 
welcome, so long as any public will pay a shilling to see him : 
but on the solid earth, under the extremely earnest stars, we 
dare not palter with him, or accept his tomfooleries any more. 
Ridiculous they seem to some ; horrible they seem to me : all 
lies, if one look whence they come and whither they go, are 
horrible. 

Alas, it will be found, I doubt, that in England more than 
in any country, our Public Life and our Private, our State 
and our Religion, and all that we do and speak (and the most 
even of what we think), is a tissue of half-truths and whole- 
lies; of hypocrisies, conventionalisms, worn-out traditionary rags 
and cobwebs ; such a life-garment of beggarly incredible and 
uncredited falsities as no honest souls of Adam's Posterity were 
ever enveloped in before. And we walk about in it with 
a stately gesture, as if it were some priestly stole or imperial 
mantle; not the foulest beggars-gabardine that ever was. 
' No Englishman dare believe the truth,' says one : ' he stands, 
for these two-hundred years, enveloped in lies of every kind ; 
from nadir to zenith an ocean of traditionary cant surrounds 
him as his life-element. He really thinks the truth dangerous. 
Poor wretch, you see him everywhere endeavouring to temper 
the truth by taking the falsity along with it, and welding 
them together ; this he calls " safe course," " moderate course," 
and other fine names ; there, balanced between God and the 
Devil, he thinks he can serve two masters, and that things 
will go well with him.' 

In the cotton-spinning and similar departments our English 
friend knows well that truth or God will have nothing to do 
with the Devil or falsehood, but will ravel all the web te 
pieces if you introduce the Devil or Non-veracity in any form 
into it : in this department, therefore, our English friend 
avoids falsehood. But in the religious, political, social, 
moral, and all other spiritual departments he freely intro- 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 161 

duces falsehood, nothing doubting ; and has long done so, 
with a profuseness not elsewhere met with in the world. 
The unhappy creature, does he not know, then, that every lie 
is accursed, and the parent of mere curses ? That he must 
think the truth ; much more speak it ? That, above all 
things, by the oldest law of Heaven and Earth which no man 
violates with impunity, he must not and shall not wag the 
tongue of him except to utter his thought ? That there is 
not a grin or beautiful acceptable grimace he can execute 
upon his poor countenance, but is either an express veracity, 
the image of what passes within him ; or else is a bit of 
Devil-worship which he and the rest of us will have to pay 
for yet? Alas, the grins he executes upon his poor mind 
(which is all tortured into St. Vitus dances, and ghastly 
merry-andrewisms, by the practice) are the most extraordinary 
this sun ever saw. 

We have Puseyisms, black-and-white surplice controversies : 
do not, officially and otherwise, the select of the longest 
heads in England sit with intense application and iron 
gravity, in open forum, judging of * prevenient grace ' ? Not 
a head of them suspects that it can be improper so to sit, 
or of the nature of treason against the Power who gave 
an Intellect to man ; that it can be other than the duty 
of a good citizen to use his godgiven intellect in investigating 
prevenient grace, supervenient moonshine, or the colour of 
the Bishop's nightmare, if that happened to turn up. I 
consider them far ahead of Cicero's Roman Augurs with 
their chicken-bowels : " Behold these divine chicken-bowels, 
O Senate and Roman People ; the midriff has fallen east- 
ward ! " solemnly intimates one Augur. " By Proserpina and 
the triple Hecate ! " exclaims the other, " I say the midriff 
has fallen to the west ! " And they look at one another with 
the seriousness of men prepared to die in their opinion, 
the authentic seriousness of men betting at TattersalFs, or 
about to receive judgment in Chancery. There is in the 
Englishman something great, beyond all Roman greatness, in 



162 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

whatever line you meet him ; even as a Latter-Day Augur he 
seeks his fellow ! Poor devil, I believe it is his intense love 
of peace, and hatred of breeding discussions which lead 
nowhither, that has led him into this sad practice of amal- 
gamating true and false. 

He has been at it these two-hundred years ; and has now 
carried it to a terrible length. He couldn't follow Oliver 
Cromwell in the Puritan path heavenward, so steep was it, 
and beset with thorns, and becoming uncertain withal. He 
much preferred, at that juncture, to go heavenward with his 
Charles Second and merry Nell Gwynns, and old decent 
formularies and good respectable aristocratic company, for 
escort ; sore he tried, by glorious restorations, glorious revo- 
lutions and so forth, to perfect this desirable amalgam ; 
hoped always it might be possible ; is only just now, if even 
now, beginning to give up the hope ; and to see with wide- 
eyed horror that it is not at Heaven he is arriving, but at 
the Stygian marshes, with their thirty-thousand Needlewomen, 
cannibal Connaughts, rivers of lamentation, continual wail of 
infants, and the yellow-burning gleam of a Hell-on-Earth ! 
Bull, my friend, you must strip that astonishing pontiff-stole, 
imperial mantle, or whatever you imagine it to be, which I 
discern to be a garment of curses, and poisoned Nessus^shirt 
now at last about to take fire upon you ; you must strip that 
off your poor body, my friend ; and, were it only in a soul's 
suit of Utilitarian buff, and such belief as that a big loaf 
is better than a small one, come forth into contact with your 
world, under true professions again, and not false. You 
wretched man, you ought to weep for half a century on 
discovering what lies you have believed, and what every lie 
leads to and proceeds from. O my friend, no honest fellow 
in this Planet was ever so served by his cooks before ; or has 
eaten such quantities and qualities of dirt as you have been 
made to do, for these two centuries past. Arise, my horribly 
maltreated yet still beloved Bull ; steep yourself in running 
water for a long while, my friend ; and begin forthwith in 






IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 163 

every conceivable direction, physical and spiritual, the long- 
expected Scavenger Age. 

Many doctors have you had, my poor friend ; but I per- 
ceive it is the Water -Cure alone that will help you: a 
complete course of scavengerism is the thing you need ! A 
new and veritable heart- divorce of England from the 
Babylonish woman, who is Jesuitism and Unveracity, and 
dwells not at Rome now, but under your own nose and 
everywhere ; whom, and her foul worship of Phantasms and 
Devils, poor England had once divorced, with a divine 
heroism not forgotten yet, and well worth remembering now : 
a clearing -out of Church and State from the unblessed 
host of Phantasms which have too long nestled thick there, 
under those astonishing ' Defenders of the Faith, 1 Defenders 
of the Hypocrisies, the spiritual Vampires and obscene 
Nightmares, under which England lies in syncope ; this is 
what you need ; and if you cannot get it, you must die, my 
poor friend ! 

Like people, like priest. Priest, King, Home Office, all 
manner of establishments and offices among a people bear 
a striking resemblance to the people itself. It is because 
Bull has been eating so much dirt that his Home Offices 
have got into such a shockingly dirty condition, the old 
pavements of them quite gone out of sight and out of 
memory, and nothing but mountains of long -accumulated 
dung in which the poor cattle are sprawling and tumbling. 
Had his own life been pure, had his own daily conduct been 
grounding itself on the clear pavements or actual beliefs and 
veracities, would he have let his Home Offices come to such a 
pass ? Not in Downing Street only, but in all other thorough- 
fares and arenas and spiritual or physical departments of his 
existence, running water and Herculean scavengerism have 
become indispensable, unless the poor man is to choke in his 
own exuviae, and die the sorrowfulest death. 

If the State could once get back to the real sight of its 



164 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

essential function, and with religious resolution begin doing 
that, and putting away its multifarious imaginary functions, 
and indignantly casting out these as mere dung and in- 
salubrious horror and abomination (which they are), what 
a promise of reform were there ! The British Home Office, 
surely this and its kindred Offices exist, if they will think of 
it, that life and work may continue possible, and may not 
become impossible, for British men. If honourable existence, 
or existence on human terms at all, have become impossible 
for millions of British men, how can the Home Office or any 
other Office long exist? With Thirty -thousand Needle- 
women, a Connaught fallen into potential cannibalism, and 
the Idle Workhouse everywhere bursting, and declaring itself 
an inhumanity and stupid ruinous brutality not much longer 
to be tolerated among rational human creatures, it is time 
the State were bethinking itself. 

So soon as the State attacks that tremendous cloaca of 
Pauperism, which will choke the world if it be not attacked, 
the State will find its real functions very different indeed 
from what it had long supposed them ! The State is a 
reality, and not a dramaturgy ; it exists here to render exist- 
ence possible, existence desirable and noble, for the State's 
subjects. The State, as it gets into the track of its real 
work, will find that same expand into whole continents of 
new unexpected, most blessed activity; as its dramatic 
functions, declared superfluous, more and more fall inert, and 
go rushing like huge torrents of extinct exuviae, dung and 
rubbish, down to the Abyss forever. O Heaven, to see a 
State that knew a little why it was there, and on what 
ground, in this Year 1850, it could pretend to exist, in so 
extremely earnest a world as ours is growing ! The British 
State, if it will be the crown and keystone of our British 
Social Existence, must get to recognise, with a veracity very 
long unknown to it, what the real objects and indispensable 
necessities of our Social Existence are. Good Heavens, it 
is not prevenient grace, or the colour of the Bishop's night- 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 165 

mare, that is pinching us; it is the impossibility to get 
along any farther for mountains of accumulated dung and 
falsity and horror; the total closing -up of noble aims 
from every man, of any aim at all, from many men, except 
that of rotting-out in Idle Workhouses an existence below 
that of beasts ! 

Suppose the State to have fairly started its ' Industrial 
Regiments of the New Era, 1 which alas, are yet only beginning 
to be talked of, what continents of new real work opened 
out, for the Home and all other Public Offices among us ! 
Suppose the Home Office looking out, as for life and salva- 
tion, for proper men to command these ' Regiments.' Suppose 
the announcement were practically made to all British souls 
that the want of wants, more indispensable than any jewel 
in the crown, was that of men able to command men in ways 
of industrial and moral welldoing ; that the State would give 
its very life for such men ; that such men were the State ; 
that the quantity of them to be found in England, lamentably 
small at present, was the exact measure of England's worth, 
what a new dawn of everlasting day for all British souls ! 
Noble British soul, to whom the gods have given faculty and 
heroism, what men call genius, here at last is a career for 
thee. It will not be needful now to swear fealty to the 
Incredible, and traitorously cramp thyself into a cowardly 
canting play-actor in God's Universe ; or, solemnly forswear- 
ing that, into a mutinous rebel and waste bandit in thy 
generation : here is an aim that is clear and credible, a 
course fit for a man. No need to become a tormenting and 
self -tormenting mutineer, banded with rebellious souls, if 
thou wouldst live ; no need to rot in suicidal idleness ; or 
take to platform preaching, and writing in Radical News- 
papers, to pull asunder the great Falsity in which thou and 
all of us are choking. The great Falsity, behold it has 
become, in the very heart of it, a great Truth of Truths ; 
and invites thee and all brave men to cooperate with it in 
transforming all the body and the joints into the noble like- 



166 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

ness of that heart ! Thrice-blessed change. The State aims, 
once more, with a true aim ; and has loadstars in the eternal 
Heaven. Struggle faithfully for it ; noble is thi* struggle ; 
thou too, according to thy faculty, shalt reap in due time, 
if thou faint not. Thou shalt have a wise command of 
men, thou shalt be wisely commanded by men, the summary 
of all blessedness for a social creature here below. The sore 
struggle, never to be relaxed, and not forgiven to any son of 
man, is once more a noble one ; glory to the Highest, it is 
now once more a true and noble one, wherein a man can 
afford to die ! Our path is now again Heavenward. Forward, 
with steady pace, with drawn weapons, and unconquerable 
hearts, in the name of God that made us all ! 

Wise obedience and wise command, I foresee that the 
regimenting of Pauper Banditti into Soldiers of Industry is 
but the beginning of this blessed process, which will extend 
to the topmost heights of our Society ; and, in the course of 
generations, make us all once more a Governed Common- 
wealth, and Civitas Dei, if it please God ! Waste-land 
Industrials succeeding, other kinds of Industry, as cloth- 
making, shoe-making, plough-making, spade-making, house- 
building, in the end, all kinds of Industry whatsoever, will 
be found capable of regimenting. Mill-operatives, all manner 
of free operatives, as yet unregimented, nomadic under private 
masters, they, seeing such example and its blessedness, will 
say : " Masters, you must regiment us a little ; make our 
interests with you permanent a little, instead of temporary 
and nomadic ; we will enlist with the State otherwise ! " 
This will go on, on the one hand, while the State-operation 
goes on, on the other : thus will all Masters of Workmen, 
private Captains of Industry, be forced to incessantly cooperate 
with the State and its public Captains ; they regimenting in 
their way, the State in its way, with ever-widening field ; till 
their fields meet (so to speak) and coalesce, and there be no 
unregimented worker, or such only as are fit to remain un- 
regimented, any more. O my friends, I clearly perceive this 



iv.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 167 

horrible cloaca of Pauperism, wearing nearly bottomless now, 
is the point where we must begin. Here, in this plainly 
unendurable portion of the general quagmire, the lowest point 
of all, and hateful even to M'Croudy, must our main drain 
begin : steadily prosecuting that, tearing that along with 
Herculean labour and divine fidelity, we shall gradually drain 
the entire Stygian swamp, and make it all once more a fruit- 
ful field ! 

For the State, I perceive, looking out with right sacred 
earnestness for persons able to command, will straightway 
also come upon the question : " What kind of schools and 
seminaries, and teaching and also preaching establishments 
have I, for the training of young souls to take command and 
to yield obedience ? Wise command, wise obedience : the 
capability of these two is the net measure of culture, and 
human virtue, in every man ; all good lies in the possession 
of these two capabilities ; all evil, wretchedness and ill-success 
in the want of these. He is a good man that can command 
and obey ; he that cannot is a bad. If my teachers and my 
preachers, with their seminaries, high schools and cathedrals, 
do train men to these gifts, the thing they are teaching and 
preaching must be true ; if they do not, not true ! " 

The State, once brought to its veracities by the thumbscrew 
in this manner, what will it think of these same seminaries and 
cathedrals ! I foresee that our Etons and Oxfords with their 
nonsense-verses, college-logics, and broken crumbs of mere 
speech, which is not even English or Teutonic speech, but 
old Grecian and Italian speech, dead and buried and much 
lying out of our way these two thousand years last past, 
will be found a most astonishing seminary for the training 
of young English souls to take command in human Industries, 
and act a valiant part under the sun ! The State does not 
want vocables, but manly wisdoms and virtues : the State, 
does it want parliamentary orators, first of all, and men 
capable of writing books ? What a ragfair of extinct monk- 
eries, high-piled here in the very shrine of our existence, 



168 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

fit to smite the generations with atrophy and beggarly 
paralysis, as we see it do ! The Minister of Education 
will not want for work, I think, in the New Downing 
Street! 

How it will go with Souls'-Overseers, and what the new 
kind will be, we do not prophesy just now. Clear it is, 
however, that the last finish of the State's efforts, in this 
operation of regimenting, will be to get the true Souls 1 - 
Overseers set over men's souls, to regiment, as the consummate 
flower of all, and constitute into some Sacred Corporation, 
bearing authority and dignity in their generation, the Chosen 
of the Wise, of the Spiritual and Devout-minded, the Reverent 
who deserve reverence, who are as the Salt of the Earth ; 
that not till this is done can the State consider its edifice to 
have reached the first story, to be safe for a moment, to be 
other than an arch without the keystones, and supported 
hitherto on mere wood. How will this be done ? Ask not ; 
let the second or the third generation after this begin to ask ! 
Alas, wise men do exist, born duly into the world in every 
current generation ; but the getting of them regimented is 
the highest pitch of human Polity, and the feat of all feats 
in political engineering : impossible for us, in this poor age, 
as the building of St. Paul's would be for Canadian Beavers, 
acquainted only with the architecture of fish-dams, and with 
no trowel but their tail. 

Literature, the strange entity so-called, that indeed is 
here. If Literature continue to be the haven of expatriated 
spiritualisms, and have its Johnsons, Goethes and true Arch- 
bishops of the World, to show for itself as heretofore, there 
may be hope in Literature. If Literature dwindle, as is 
probable, into mere merry-andrewism, windy twaddle, and feats 
of spiritual legerdemain, analogous to rope-dancing, opera- 
dancing, and street-fiddling with a hat carried round for 
halfpence or for guineas, there will be no hope in Literature. 
What if our next set of Souls'-Overseers were to be silent 
ones very mainly ? Alas, alas, why gaze into the blessed 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 169 

continents and delectable mountains of a Future based on 
truth, while as yet we struggle far down, nigh suffocated in a 
slough of lies, uncertain whether or how we shall be able to 
climb at all ! 

Who will begin the long steep journey with us ; who of 
living statesmen will snatch the standard, and say, like a hero 
on the forlorn-hope for his country, Forward ! Or is there 
none ; no one that can and dare ? And our lot, too, then, 
is Anarchy by barricade or ballot-box, and Social Death ? 
We will not think so. 

Whether Sir Robert Peel will undertake the Reform of 
Downing Street for us, or any Ministry or Reform farther, 
is not known. He, they say, is getting old, does himself 
recoil from it, and shudder at it ; which is possible enough. 
The clubs and coteries appear to have settled that he surely 
will not; and this melancholy wriggling seesaw of redtape 
Trojans and Protectionist Greeks must continue its course 
till what can happen, my friends, if this go on continuing ? 

And yet, perhaps, England has by no means so settled it. 
Quit the clubs and coteries, you do not hear two rational 
men speak long together upon politics, without pointing their 
inquiries towards this man. A Minister that will attack the 
Augias Stable of Downing Street, and begin producing a real 
Management, no longer an imaginary one, of our affairs ; he, 
or else in few years Chartist Parliament and the Deluge 
come : that seems the alternative. As I read the omens, 
there was no man in my time more authentically called to 
a post of difficulty, of danger, and of honour than this man. 
The enterprise is ready for him, if he is ready for it. He 
has but to lift his finger in this enterprise, and whatsoever is 
wise and manful in England will rally round him. If the 
faculty and heart for it be in him, he, strangely and almost 
tragically if we look upon his history, is to have leave to try 
it; he now, at the eleventh hour, has the opportunity for 



170 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

such a feat in reform as has not, in these late generations, 
been attempted by all our reformers put together. 

As for Protectionist jargon, who in these earnest days 
would occupy many moments of his time with that ? ' A 
Costermonger in this street,"* says Crabbe, * finding lately that 
his rope of onions, which he hoped would have brought a 
shilling, was to go for only sevenpence henceforth, burst forth 
into lamentation, execration and the most pathetic tears. 
Throwing up the window, I perceived the other costermongers 
preparing impatiently to pack this one out of their company 
as a disgrace to it, if he would not hold his peace and take 
the market rate for his onions. I looked better at this 
Costermonger. To my astonished imagination, a star-and- 
garter dawned upon the dim figure of the man ; and I per- 
ceived that here was no Costermonger to be expelled with 
ignominy, but a sublime goddess-born Ducal Individual, 
whom I forbear to name at this moment ! What an omen ; 
nay, to my astonished imagination, there dawned still fataler 
omens. Surely, of all human trades ever heard of, the trade 
of Owning Land in England ought not to bully us for drink- 
money just now ! ' 

* Hansard's Debates, 1 continues Crabbe farther on, * present 
many inconsistencies of speech ; lamentable unveracities uttered 
in Parliament, by one and indeed by all ; in which sad list 
Sir Robert Peel stands for his share among others. Un- 
veracities not a few were spoken in Parliament ; in fact, to 
one with a sense of what is called God's truth, it seemed all 
one unveracity, a talking from the teeth outward, not as the 
convictions but as the expediencies and inward astucities 
directed ; and, in the sense of God's truth, I have heard no 
true word uttered in Parliament at all. Most lamentable 
unveracities continually spoken in Parliament, by almost every 
one that had to open his mouth there. But the largest 
veracity ever done in Parliament in our time, as we all know, 
was of this man's doing ; and that, you will find, is a very 
considerable item in the calculation ! ' 



IV.] THE NEW DOWNING STREET 171 

Yes, and I believe England in her dumb way remembers 
that too. And * the Traitor Peel ' can very well afford to 
let innumerable Ducal Costermongers, parliamentary Adven- 
turers, and lineal representatives of the Impenitent Thief, say 
all their say about him, and do all their do. With a virtual 
England at his back, and an actual eternal sky above him, 
there is not much in the total net-amount of that. When 
the master of the horse rides abroad, many dogs in the village 
bark ; but he pursues his journey all the same. 



No. V. 
STUMP-ORATOR 

[IST MAY I860.] 

IT lies deep in our habits, confirmed by all manner of educa- 
tional and other arrangements for several centuries back, to 
consider human talent as best of all evincing itself by the 
faculty of eloquent speech. Our earliest schoolmasters teach 
us, as the one gift of culture they have, the art of spelling 
and pronouncing, the rules of correct speech ; rhetorics, logics 
follow, sublime mysteries of grammar, whereby we may not 
only speak but write. And onward to the last of our school- 
masters in the highest university, it is still intrinsically 
grammar, under various figures grammar. To speak in 
various languages, on various things, but on all of them to 
speak, and appropriately deliver ourselves by tongue or pen, 
this is the sublime goal towards which all manner of 
beneficent preceptors and learned professors, from the lowest 
hornbook upwards, are continually urging and guiding us. 
Preceptor or professor, looking over his miraculous seedplot, 
seminary as he well calls it, or crop of young human souls, 
watches with attentive view one organ of his delightful little 
seedlings growing to be men, the tongue. He hopes we 
shall all get to speak yet, if it please Heaven. " Some of you 
shall be book-writers, eloquent review-writers, and astonish 
mankind, my young friends : others in white neckcloths shall 
do sermons by Blair and Lindley Murray, nay, by Jeremy 
Taylor and judicious Hooker, and be priests to guide men 
heavenward by skilfully brandished handkerchief and the torch 
of rhetoric. For others there is Parliament and the election 
beerbarrel, and a course that leads men very high indeed ; 

172 



NO. v.] STUMP-ORATOR 173 

these shall shake the senate-house, the Morning Newspapers, 
shake the very spheres, and by dextrous wagging of the tongue 
disenthral mankind, and lead our afflicted country and us on 
the way we are to go. The way if not where noble deeds 
are done, yet where noble words are spoken, leading us 
if not to the real Home of the Gods, at least to something 
which shall more or less deceptively resemble it ! " 

So fares it with the son of Adam, in these bewildered 
epochs ; so, from the first opening of his eyes in this world, 
to his last closing of them, and departure hence. Speak, 
speak, O speak ; if thou have any faculty, speak it, or thou 
diest and it is no faculty ! So in universities, and all manner 
of dames' and other schools, of the very highest class as of 
the very lowest ; and Society at large, when we enter there, 
confirms with all its brilliant review-articles, successful publi- 
cations, intellectual tea-circles, literary gazettes, parliamentary 
eloquences, the grand lesson we had. Other lesson in fact we 
have none, in these times. If there be a human talent, let it 
get into the tongue, and make melody with that organ. The 
talent that can say nothing for itself, what is it ? Nothing ; 
or a thing that can do mere drudgeries, and at best make 
money by railways. 

All this is deep-rooted in our habits, in our social, educa- 
tional and other arrangements ; and all this, when we look 
at it impartially, is astonishing. Directly in the teeth of all 
this it may be asserted that speaking is by no means the chief 
faculty a human being can attain to; that his excellence therein 
is by no means the best test of his general human excellence, 
or availability in this world ; nay, that, unless we look well, it 
is liable to become the very worst test ever devised for said 
availability. The matter extends very far, down to the very 
roots of the world, whither the British reader cannot con- 
veniently follow me just now ; but I will venture to assert the 
three following things, and invite him to consider well what 
truth he can gradually find in them : 

First, that excellent speech, even speech really excellent, 



174 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

is not, and never was, the chief test of human faculty, or the 
measure of a man's ability, for any true function whatsoever ; 
on the contrary, that excellent silence needed always to accom- 
pany excellent speech, and was and is a much rarer and more 
difficult gift. 

Secondly, that really excellent speech, which I, being pos- 
sessed of the Hebrew Bible or Book, as well as of other books 
in my own and foreign languages, and having occasionally 
heard a wise man's word among the crowd of unwise, do 
almost unspeakably esteem, as a human gift, is terribly apt 
to get confounded with its counterfeit, sham-excellent speech ! 
And furthermore, that if really excellent human speech is 
among the best of human things, then sham-excellent ditto 
deserves to be ranked with the very worst. False speech, 
capable of becoming, as some one has said, the falsest and 
basest of all human things : put the case, one were listening 
to that as to the truest and noblest ! Which, little as we are 
conscious of it, I take to be the sad lot of many excellent 
souls among us just now. So many as admire parliamentary 
eloquence, divine popular literature, and suchlike, are dread- 
fully liable to it just now : and whole nations and generations 
seem as if getting themselves asphyxiaed, constitutionally, into 
their last sleep, by means of it just now ! 

For alas, much as we worship speech on all hands, here is 
a third assertion which a man may venture to make, and invite 
considerate men to reflect upon : That in these times, and for 
several generations back, there has been, strictly considered, 
no really excellent speech at all, but sham-excellent merely; 
that is to say, false or quasi-false speech getting itself admired 
and worshipped, instead of detested and suppressed. A truly 
alarming predicament ; and not the less so if we find it a quite 
pleasant one for the time being, and welcome the advent of 
asphyxia, as we would that of comfortable natural sleep ; as, 
in so many senses, we are doing ! Surly judges there have 
been who did not much admire the * Bible of Modern Litera- 
ture,' or anything you could distil from it, in contrast with 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 175 

the ancient Bibles ; and found that in the matter of speaking, 
our far best excellence, where that could be obtained, was 
excellent silence, which means endurance and exertion, and 
good work with lips closed ; and that our tolerablest speech 
was of the nature of honest commonplace introduced where 
indispensable, which only set-up for being brief and true, and 
could not be mistaken for excellent. 

These are hard sayings for many a British reader, un- 
conscious of any damage, nay, joyfully conscious to himself of 
much profit, from that side of his possessions. Surely on this 
side, if on no other, matters stood not ill with him ? The 
ingenuous arts had softened his manners ; the parliamentary 
eloquences supplied him with a succedaneum for government, 
the popular literatures with the finer sensibilities of the heart : 
surely on this windward side of things the British reader was 
not ill off? Unhappy British reader ! 

In fact, the spiritual detriment we unconsciously suffer, in 
every province of our affairs, from this our prostrate respect to 
power of speech is incalculable. For indeed it is the natural 
consummation of an epoch such as ours. Given a general 
insincerity of mind for several generations, you will certainly 
find the Talker established in the place of honour ; and the 
Doer, hidden in the obscure crowd, with activity lamed, or 
working sorrowfully forward on paths unworthy of him. All 
men are devoutly prostrate, worshipping the eloquent talker ; 
and no man knows what a scandalous idol Jie is. Out of 
whom in the mildest manner, like comfortable natural rest, 
comes mere asphyxia and death everlasting ! Probably there 
is not in Nature a more distracted phantasm than your 
commonplace eloquent speaker, as he is found on platforms, 
in parliaments, on Kentucky stumps, at tavern-dinners, in 
windy, empty, insincere times like ours. The * excellent 
Stump-Orator,' as our admiring Yankee friends define him, 
he who in any occurrent set of circumstances can start forth, 
mount upon his * stump,' his rostrum, tribune, place in 
parliament, or other ready elevation, and pour forth from 



176 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

him his appropriate * excellent speech, 1 his interpretation of 
the said circumstances, in such manner as poor windy mortals 
round him shall cry bravo to, he is not an artist I can 
much admire, as matters go ! Alas, he is in general merely 
the windiest mortal of them all ; and is admired for being 
so, into the bargain. Not a windy blockhead there who 
kept silent but is better off than this excellent stump-orator. 
Better off, for a great many reasons ; for this reason, were 
there no other : the silent one is not admired ; the silent 
suspects, perhaps partly admits, that he is a kind of block- 
head, from which salutary self-knowledge the excellent 
stump-orator is debarred. A mouthpiece of Chaos to poor 
benighted mortals that lend ear to him as to a voice from 
Cosmos, this excellent stump-orator fills me with amazement. 
Not empty these musical wind-utterances of his ; they are 
big with prophecy ; they announce, too audibly to me, that 
the end of many things is drawing nigh ! 

Let the British reader consider it a little ; he too is not 
a little interested in it. Nay, he, and the European reader in 
general, but he chiefly in these days, will require to consider 
it a great deal, and to take important steps in consequence 
by and by, if I mistake not. And in the mean while, sunk 
as he himself is in that bad element, and like a jaundiced 
man struggling to discriminate yellow colours, he will have 
to meditate long before he in any measure get the immense 
meanings of the thing brought home to him ; and discern, 
with astonishment, alarm, and almost terror and despair, 
towards what fatal issues, in our Collective Wisdom and 
elsewhere, this notion of talent meaning eloquent speech, 
so obstinately entertained this long while, has been leading 
us ! Whosoever shall look well into origins and issues, will 
find this of eloquence and the part it now plays in our affairs, 
to be one of the gravest phenomena ; and the excellent stump- 
orator of these days to be not only a ridiculous but still more 
a highly tragical personage. While the many listen to him, 
the few are used to pass rapidly, with some gust of scornful 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 177 

laughter, some growl of impatient malediction ; but he de- 
serves from this latter class a much more serious attention. 

In the old Ages, when Universities and Schools were first 
instituted, this function of the schoolmaster, to teach mere 
speaking, was the natural one. In those healthy times, 
guided by silent instincts and the monition of Nature, men 
had from of old been used to teach themselves what it was 
essential to learn, by the one sure method of learning any- 
thing, practical apprenticeship to it. This was the rule for 
all classes ; as it now is the rule, unluckily, for only one class. 
The Working Man as yet sought only to know his craft ; and 
educated himself sufficiently by ploughing and hammering, 
under the conditions given, and in fit relation to the persons 
given : a course of education, then as now and ever, really 
opulent in manful culture and instruction to him ; teaching 
him many solid virtues, and most indubitably useful know- 
ledges ; developing in him valuable faculties not a few both 
to do and to endure, among which the faculty of elaborate 
grammatical utterance, seeing he had so little of extraordin- 
ary to utter, or to learn from spoken or written utterances, 
was not bargained for; the grammar of Nature, which he 
learned from his mother, being still amply sufficient for 
him. This was, as it still is, the grand education of the 
Working Man. 

As for the Priest, though his trade was clearly of a reading 
and speaking nature, he knew also in those veracious times 
that grammar, if needful, was by no means the one thing 
needful, or the chief thing. By far the chief thing needful, 
and indeed the one thing then as now, was, That there should 
be in him the feeling and the practice of reverence to God 
and to men ; that in his life's core there should dwell, spoken 
or silent, a ray of pious wisdom fit for illuminating dark human 
destinies ; not so much that he should possess the art of 
speech, as that he should have something to speak ! And 
for that latter requisite the Priest also trained himself by 

M 



178 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

apprenticeship, by actual attempt to practise, by manifold 
long-continued trial, of a devout and painful nature, such as 
his superiors prescribed to him. This, when once judged 
satisfactory, procured him ordination ; and his grammar- 
learning, in the good times of priesthood, was very much of 
a parergon with him, as indeed in all times it is intrinsically 
quite insignificant in comparison. 

The young Noble again, for whom grammar schoolmasters 
were first hired and high seminaries founded, he too without 
these, or over and above these, had from immemorial time 
been used to learn his business by apprenticeship. The young 
Noble, before the schoolmaster as after him, went apprentice 
to some elder noble ; entered himself as page with some dis- 
tinguished earl or duke ; and here, serving upwards from step 
to step, under wise monition, learned his chivalries, his practice 
of arms and of courtesies, his baronial duties and manners, and 
what it would beseem him to do and to be in the world, by 
practical attempt of his own, and example of one whose life 
was a daily concrete pattern for him. To such a one, already 
filled with intellectual substance, and possessing what we may 
call the practical gold-bullion of human culture, it was an 
obvious improvement that he should be taught to speak it 
out of him on occasion ; that he should carry a spiritual 
banknote producible on demand for what of * gold-bullion ' 
he had, not so negotiable otherwise, stored in the cellars of 
his mind. A man, with wisdom, insight and heroic worth 
already acquired for him, naturally demanded of the school- 
master this one new faculty, the faculty of uttering in fit 
words what he had. A valuable super-addition of faculty : 
and yet we are to remember it was scarcely a new faculty ; 
it was but the tangible sign of what other faculties the man 
had in the silent state : and many a rugged inarticulate chief 
of men, I can believe, was most enviably * educated, 1 who had 
not a Book on his premises; whose signature, a true sign- 
manual, was the stamp of his iron hand duly inked and clapt 
upon the parchment; and whose speech in Parliament, like 



v.] STUMP-ORATOR 179 

the growl of lions, did indeed convey his meaning, but would 
have torn Lindley Murray's nerves to pieces ! To such a 
one the schoolmaster adjusted himself very naturally in that 
manner; as a man wanted for teaching grammatical utter- 
ance ; the thing to utter being already there. The thing to 
utter, here was the grand point ! And perhaps this is the 
reason why among earnest nations, as among the Romans for 
example, the craft of the schoolmaster was held in little 
regard ; for indeed as mere teacher of grammar, of ciphering 
on the abacus and suchlike, how did he differ much from the 
dancing-master or fencing-master, or deserve much regard ? 
Such was the rule in the ancient healthy times. 

Can it be doubtful that this is still the rule of human 
education ; that the human creature needs first of all to be 
educated not that he may speak, but that he may have some- 
thing weighty and valuable to say ! If speech is the bank- 
note for an inward capital of culture, of insight and noble 
human worth, then speech is precious, and the art of speech 
shall be honoured. But if there is no inward capital; if 
speech represent no real culture of the mind, but an imaginary 
culture ; no bullion, but the fatal and now almost hopeless 
deficit of such ? Alas, alas, said banknote is then a forged 
one; passing freely current in the market; but bringing 
damages to the receiver, to the payer, and to all the world, 
which are in sad truth infallible, and of amount incalculable. 
Few think of it at present ; but the truth remains forever so. 
In parliaments and other loud assemblages, your eloquent talk, 
disunited from Nature and her facts, is taken as wisdom and 
the correct image of said facts : but Nature Avell knows what 
it is, Nature will not have it as such, and will reject your 
forged note one day, with huge costs. The foolish traders in 
the market pass it freely, nothing doubting, and rejoice in 
the dextrous execution of the piece : and so it circulates 
from hand to hand, and from class to class ; gravitating ever 
downwards towards the practical class ; till at last it reaches 



180 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

some poor working hand, who can pass it no farther, but 
must take it to the bank to get bread with it, and there the 
answer is, " Unhappy caitiff, this note is forged. It does not 
mean performance and reality, in parliaments and elsewhere, 
for thy behoof ; it means fallacious semblance of performance ; 
and thou, poor dupe, art thrown into the stocks on offering 
it here!" 

Alas, alas, looking abroad over Irish difficulties, Mosaic 
sweating-establishments, French barricades, and an anarchic 
Europe, is it not as if all the populations of the world were 
rising or had risen into incendiary madness ; unable longer to 
endure such an avalanche of forgeries, and of penalties in 
consequence, as had accumulated upon them ? The speaker 
is * excellent ' ; the notes he does are beautiful ? Beautifully 
fit for the market, yes ; he is an excellent artist in his business ; 
and the more excellent he is, the more is my desire to lay 
him by the heels, and fling him into the treadmill, that I 
might save the poor sweating tailors, French Sansculottes, and 
Irish Sanspotatoes from bearing the smart ! 

For the smart must be borne ; some one must bear it, as 
sure as God lives. Every word of man is either a note or a 
forged-note : have these eternal skies forgotten to be in 
earnest, think you, because men go grinning like enchanted 
apes? Foolish souls, this now as of old is the unalterable 
law of your existence. If you know the truth and do it, the 
Universe itself seconds you, bears you on to sure victory every- 
where : and, observe, to sure defeat everywhere if you do not 
do the truth. And alas, if you know only the eloquent 
fallacious semblance of the truth, what chance is there of your 
ever doing it ? You will do something very different from it, 
I think ! He who well considers, will find this same * art of 
speech,' as we moderns have it, to be a truly astonishing 
product of the Ages ; and the longer he considers it, the 
more astonishing and alarming. I reckon it the saddest of 
all the curses that now lie heavy on us. With horror and 
amazement, one perceives that this much-celebrated * art, 1 so 






V.] STUMP. ORATOR 181 

diligently practised in all corners of the world just now, is 
the chief destroyer of whatever good is born to us (softly, 
swiftly shutting-up all nascent good, as if under exhausted 
glass-receivers, there to choke and die) ; and the grand parent- 
manufactory of evil to us, as it were, the last finishing and 
varnishing workshop of all the Devil's ware that circulates 
under the sun. No Devil's sham is fit for the market till it 
have been polished and enamelled here ; this is the general 
assaying-house for such, where the artists examine and answer, 
" Fit for the market ; not fit ! " Words will not express what 
mischiefs the misuse of words has done, and is doing, in these 
heavyladen generations. 

Do you want a man not to practise what he believes, then 
encourage him to keep often speaking it in words. Every 
time he speaks it, the tendency to do it will grow less. His 
empty speech of what he believes, will be a weariness and an 
affliction to the wise man. But do you wish his empty speech 
of what he believes to become farther an insincere speech of 
what he does not believe ? Celebrate to him his gift of speech ; 
assure him that he shall rise in Parliament by means of it, 
and achieve great things without any performance ; that 
eloquent speech, whether performed or not, is admirable. 
My friends, eloquent unperformed speech, in Parliament or 
elsewhere, is horrible ! The eloquent man that delivers, in 
Parliament or elsewhere, a beautiful speech, and will perform 
nothing of it, but leaves it as if already performed, what 
can you make of that man ? He has enrolled himself among 
the Ignes Fatui and Children of the Wind ; means to serve, 
as beautifully illuminated Chinese Lantern, in that corps 
henceforth. I think, the serviceable thing you could do to 
that man, if permissible, would be a severe one : To clip-off a 
bit of his eloquent tongue by way of penance and warning; 
another bit, if he again spoke without performing ; and so 
again, till you had dipt the whole tongue away from him, 
and were delivered, you and he, from at least one miserable 
mockery : " There, eloquent friend, see now in silence if there 



182 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

be any redeeming deed in thee ; of blasphemous wind- 
eloquence, at least, we shall have no more ! " How many 
pretty men have gone this road, escorted by the beautifulest 
marching music from all the * public organs ' ; and have found 
at last that it ended where ? It is the broad road, that leads 
direct to Limbo and the Kingdom of the Inane. Gifted 
men, and once valiant nations, and as it were the whole world 
with one accord, are marching thither, in melodious triumph, 
all the drums and hautboys giving out their cheerfulest (^a-ira. 
It is the universal humour of the world just now. My friends, 
I am very sure you will arrive, unless you halt ! 

Considered as the last finish of education, or of human 
culture, worth and acquirement, the art of speech is noble, 
and even divine ; it is like the kindling of a Heaven's light 
to show us what a glorious world exists, and has perfected 
itself, in a man. But if no world exist in the man ; if 
nothing but continents of empty vapour, of greedy self- 
conceits, commonplace hearsays, and indistinct loomings of 
a sordid chaos exist in him, what will be the use of ' light ' to 
show us that ? Better a thousand times that such a man do 
not speak ; but keep his empty vapour and his sordid chaos 
to himself, hidden to the utmost from all beholders. To 
look on that, can be good for no human beholder ; to look 
away from that, must be good. And if, by delusive 
semblances of rhetoric, logic, first-class degrees, and the aid 
of elocution -masters and parliamentary reporters, the poor 
proprietor of said chaos should be led to persuade himself, 
and get others persuaded, which it is the nature of his sad 
task to do, and which, in certain eras of the world, it is 
fatally possible to do, that this is a cosmos which he owns ; 
that he, being so perfect in tongue-exercise and full of college- 
honours, is an * educated ' man, and pearl of great price in 
his generation ; that round him, and his parliament emulously 
listening to him, as round some divine apple of gold set in a 
picture of silver, all the world should gather to adore : what 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 183 

is likely to become of him and the gathering world? An 
apple of Sodom set in the clusters of Gomorrah : that, little 
as he suspects it, is the definition of the poor chaotically 
eloquent man, with his emulous parliament and miserable 
adoring world ! Considered as the whole of education, or 
human culture, which it now is in our modern manners ; all 
apprenticeship except to mere handicraft having fallen 
obsolete, and the ' educated man ' being with us emphatically 
and exclusively the man that can speak well with tongue or 
pen, and astonish men by the quantities of speech he has 
heard ( f tremendous reader," 1 ' walking encyclopaedia, 1 and such- 
like), the Art of Speech is probably definable in that case 
as the short summary of all the Black Arts put together. 



But the Schoolmaster is secondary, an effect rather than a 
cause in this matter : what the Schoolmaster with his 
universities shall manage or attempt to teach will be ruled 
by what the Society with its practical industries is con- 
tinually demanding that men should learn. We spoke once 
of vital lungs for Society : and in fact this question always 
rises as the alpha and omega of social questions, What 
methods the Society has of summoning aloft into the high 
places, for its help and governance, the wisdom that is born 
to it in all places, and of course is born chiefly in the more 
populous or lower places ? For this, if you will consider it, 
expresses the ultimate available result, and net sum-total, of 
all the efforts, struggles and confused activities that go on in 
the Society ; and determines whether they are true and wise 
efforts, certain to be victorious, or false and foolish, certain 
to be futile, and to fall captive and caitiff. How do men 
rise in your Society ? In all Societies, Turkey included, and 
I suppose Dahomey included, men do rise ; but the question 
of questions always is, What kind of men ? Men of noble 
gifts, or men of ignoble ? It is the one or the other ; and a 



184 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

life-and-death inquiry which ! For in all places and all times, 
little as you may heed it, Nature most silently but most in- 
exorably demands that it be the one and not the other. And 
you need not try to palm an ignoble sham upon her, and 
call it noble; for she is a judge. And her penalties, as 
quiet as she looks, are terrible; amounting to world-earth- 
quakes, to anarchy and death everlasting ; and admit of no 
appeal ! 

Surely England still flatters herself that she has lungs ; 
that she can still breathe a little ? Or is it that the poor 
creature, driven into mere blind industrialisms ; and as it 
were, gone pearl-diving this long while many fathoms deep, 
and tearing-up the oyster-beds so as never creature did before, 
hardly knows, so busy in the belly of the oyster-chaos, 
where is no thought of ' breathing/ whether she has lungs 
or not ? Nations of a robust habit, and fine deep chest, can 
sometimes take-in a deal of breath before diving ; and live 
long, in the muddy deeps, without new breath : but they too 
come to need it at last, and will die if they cannot get it ! 

To the gifted soul that is born in England, what is the 
career, then, that will carry him, amid noble Olympic dust, 
up to the immortal gods ? For his country's sake, that it 
may not lose the service he was born capable of doing it ; for 
his own sake, that his life be not choked and perverted, and 
his light from Heaven be not changed into lightning from 
the Other Place, it is essential that there be such a career. 
The country that can offer no career in that case, is a doomed 
country ; nay, it is already a dead country : it has secured the 
ban of Heaven upon it ; will not have Heaven's light, will 
have the Other Place's lightning ; and may consider itself as 
appointed to expire, in frightful coughings of street musketry 
or otherwise, on a set day, and to be in the eye of law dead. 
In no country is there not some career, inviting to it either 
the noble Hero, or the tough Greek of the Lower Empire : 
which of the two do your careers invite ? There is no 
question more important. The kind of careers you offer in 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 185 

countries still living, determines with perfect exactness the 
kind of the life that is in them, whether it is natural 
blessed life, or galvanic accursed ditto, and likewise what 
degree of strength is in the same. 

Our English careers to born genius are twofold. There is 
the silent or unlearned career of the Industrialisms, which 
are very many among us ; and there is the articulate or 
learned career of the three professions, Medicine, Law (under 
which we may include Politics), and the Church. Your born 
genius, therefore, will first have to ask himself, Whether he 
can hold his tongue or cannot ? True, all human talent, 
especially all deep talent, is a talent to do, and is intrinsically 
of silent nature ; inaudible, like the Sphere Harmonies and 
Eternal Melodies, of which it is an incarnated fraction. All 
real talent, I fancy, would much rather, if it listened only to 
Nature's monitions, express itself in rhythmic facts than in 
melodious words, which latter at best, where they are good 
for anything, are only a feeble echo and shadow or fore- 
shadow of the former. But talents differ much in this of 
power to be silent ; and circumstances, of position, oppor- 
tunity and suchlike, modify them still more ; and Nature's 
monitions, oftenest quite drowned in foreign hearsays, are by 
no means the only ones listened to in deciding ! The 
Industrialisms are all of silent nature ; and some of them are 
heroic and eminently human ; others, again, we may call 
unheroic, not eminently human : beaverwh rather, but still 
honest ; some are even vulpine, altogether inhuman and dis- 
honest. Your born genius must make his choice. 

If a soul is born with divine intelligence, and has its lips 
touched with hallowed fire, in consecration for high enterprises 
under the sun, this young soul will find the question asked of 
him by England every hour and moment : " Canst thou turn 
thy human intelligence into the beaver sort, and make honest 
contrivance, and accumulation of capital by it? If so, do 
it ; and avoid the vulpine kind, which I don't recommend. 
Honest triumphs in engineering and machinery await thee ; 



186 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

scrip awaits thee, commercial successes, kingship in the count- 
ing-room, on the stock-exchange ; thou shalt be the envy of 
surrounding flunkies, and collect into a heap more gold than 
a dray-horse can draw." "Gold, so much gold?" answers 
the ingenuous soul, with visions of the envy of surrounding 
flunkies dawning on him ; and in very many cases decides 
that he will contract himself into beaverism, and with such a 
horse-draught of gold, emblem of a never-imagined success in 
beaver heroism, strike the surrounding flunkies yellow. 

This is our common course ; this is in some sort open to 
every creature, what we call the beaver career ; perhaps more 
open in England, taking in America too, than it ever was in 
any country before. And, truly, good consequences follow 
out of it : who can be blind to them ? Half of a most ex- 
cellent and opulent result is realised to us in this way; baleful 
only when it sets-up (as too often now) for being the whole 
result. A half-result which will be blessed and heavenly so 
soon as the other half is had, namely, wisdom to guide the 
first half. Let us honour all honest human power of con- 
trivance in its degree. The beaver intellect, so long as it 
stedfastly refuses to be vulpine, and answers the tempter 
pointing out short routes to it with an honest " No, no," is 
truly respectable to me ; and many a highflying speaker and 
singer whom I have known, has appeared to me much less of 
a developed man than certain of my mill-owning, agricultural, 
commercial, mechanical, or otherwise industrial friends, who 
have held their peace all their days and gone on in the silent 
state. If a man can keep his intellect silent, and make it 
even into honest beaverism, several very manful moralities, in 
danger of wreck on other courses, may comport well with 
that, and give it a genuine and partly human character ; and 
I will tell him, in these days he may do far worse with him- 
self and his intellect than change it into beaverism, and make 
honest money with it. If indeed he could become a heroic 
industrial, and have a life ' eminently human ' ! But that is 
not easy at present. Probably some ninety-nine out of every 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 187 

hundred of our gifted souls, who have to seek a career for 
themselves, go this beaver road. Whereby the first half- 
result, national wealth namely, is plentifully realised; and 
only the second half, or wisdom to guide it, is dreadfully 
behindhand. 

But now if the gifted soul be not of taciturn nature, be of 
vivid, impatient, rapidly-productive nature, and aspire much 
to give itself sensible utterance, I find that, in this case, 
the field it has in England is narrow to an extreme ; is per- 
haps narrower than ever offered itself, for the like object, in 
this world before. Parliament, Church, Law : let the young 
vivid soul turn whither he will for a career, he finds among 
variable conditions one condition invariable, and extremely 
surprising, That the proof of excellence is to be done by the 
tongue. For heroism that will not speak, but only act, there 
is no account kept : The English Nation does not need that 
silent kind, then, but only the talking kind ? Most astonish- 
ing. Of all the organs a man has, there is none held in 
account, it would appear, but the tongue he uses for talking. 
Premiership, woolsack, mitre, and quasi-crown : all is attainable 
if you can talk with due ability. Everywhere your proof-shot 
is to be a well-fired volley of talk. Contrive to talk well, 
you will get to Heaven, the modern Heaven of the English. 
Do not talk well, only work well, and heroically hold your 
peace, you have no chance whatever to get thither ; with your 
utmost industry you may get to Threadneedle Street, and 
accumulate more gold than a drayhorse can draw. Is not this 
a very wonderful arrangement ? 

I have heard of races done by mortals tied in sacks ; of 
human competitors, high aspirants, climbing heavenward on 
the soaped pole ; seizing the soaped pig ; and clutching with 
deft fist, at full gallop, the fated goose tied aloft by its foot ; 
which feats do prove agility, toughness and other useful 
faculties in man : but this of dextrous talk is probably as 
strange a competition as any. And the question rises, 
Whether certain of these other feats, or perhaps an alter- 



188 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

nation of all of them, relieved now and then by a bout of 
grinning through the collar, might not be profitably substi- 
tuted for the solitary proof-feat of talk, now getting rather 
monotonous by its long continuance ? Alas, Mr. Bull, I do 
find it is all little other than a proof of toughness, which is 
a quality I respect, with more or less expenditure of falsity 
and astucity superadded, which I entirely condemn. Tough- 
ness plus astucity : perhaps a simple wooden mast set up in 
Palace- Yard, well soaped and duly presided over, might be 
the honester method ? Such a method as this by trial of 
talk, for filling your chief offices in Church and State, was 
perhaps never heard of in the solar system before. You are 
quite used to it, my poor friend ; and nearly dead by the 
consequences of it : but in the other Planets, as in other 
epochs of your own Planet it would have done had you pro- 
posed it, the thing awakens incredulous amazement, world- 
wide Olympic laughter, which ends in tempestuous hootings, 
in tears and horror ! My friend, if you can, as heretofore 
this good while, find nobody to take care of your affairs 
but the expertest talker, it is all over with your affairs 
and you. Talk never yet could guide any man's or nation's 
affairs ; nor will it yours, except towards the Linibus Patrum, 
where all talk, except a very select kind of it, lodges at last. 

Medicine, guarded too by preliminary impediments, and 
frightful medusa-heads of quackery, which deter many gener- 
ous souls from entering, is of the Aa^articulate professions, 
and does not much invite the ardent kinds of ambition. The 
intellect required for medicine might be wholly human, and 
indeed should by all rules be, the profession of the Human 
Healer being radically a sacred one and connected with the 
highest priesthoods, or rather being itself the outcome and 
acme of all priesthoods, and divinest conquests of intellect 
here below. As will appear one day, when men take off their 
old monastic and ecclesiastic spectacles, and look with eyes 
again ! In essence the Physician's task is always heroic, 



v.] STUMP-ORATOR 189 

eminently human : but in practice most unluckily at present 
we find it too become in good part beaverish ; yielding a 
money-result alone. And what of it is not beaverish, does 
not that too go mainly to ingenious talking, publishing of 
yourself, ingratiating of yourself ; a partly human exercise or 
waste of intellect, and, alas, a partly vulpine ditto ; making 
the once sacred 'lar/oo?, or Human Healer, more impossible 
for us than ever ! 

Angry basilisks watch at the gates of Law and Church just 
now ; and strike a sad damp into the nobler of the young 
aspirants. Hard bonds are offered you to sign ; as it were, 
a solemn engagement to constitute yourself an impostor, 
before ever entering ; to declare your belief in incredibilities, 
your determination, in short, to take Chaos for Cosmos, 
and Satan for the Lord of things, if he come with money in 
his pockets, and horsehair and bombazeen decently wrapped 
about him. Fatal preliminaries, which deter many an in- 
genuous young soul, and send him back from the threshold, 
and I hope will deter ever more. But if you do enter, the 
condition is well known : " Talk ; who can talk best here ? 
His shall be the mouth of gold, and the purse of gold ; and 
with my pirpa (once the head-dress of unfortunate-females, I 
am told) shall his sacred temples be begirt." 

Ingenuous souls, unless forced to it, do now much 
shudder at the threshold of both these careers, and not a few 
desperately turn back into the wilderness rather, to front a 
very rude fortune, and be devoured by wild-beasts as is 
likeliest. But as to Parliament, again, and its eligibility if 
attainable, there is yet no question anywhere ; the ingenuous 
soul, if possessed of money-capital enough, is predestined by 
the parental and all manner of monitors to that career of 
talk ; and accepts it with alacrity and clearness of heart, 
doubtful only whether he shall be able to make a speech. 
Courage, my brave young fellow. If you can climb a soaped 
pole of any kind, you will certainly be able to make a speech. 
All mortals have a tongue ; and carry on some jumble, if not 



190 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

of thought, yet of stuff which they could talk. The 
weakest of animals has got a cry in it, and can give voice 
before dying. If you are tough enough, bent upon it des- 
perately enough, I engage you shall make a speech ; but 
whether that will be the way to Heaven for you, I do not 
engage. 

These, then, are our two careers for genius : mute Indus- 
trialism, which can seldom become very human, but remains 
beaverish mainly : and the three Professions named learned, 
that is to say, able to talk. For the heroic or higher kinds 
of human intellect, in the silent state, there is not the smallest 
inquiry anywhere ; apparently a thing not wanted in this 
country at present. What the supply may be, I cannot 
inform M'Croudy; but the market-demand, he may himself 
see, is nil. These are our three professions that require 
human intellect in part or whole, not able to do with mere 
beaverish ; and such a part does the gift of talk play in one 
and all of them. Whatsoever is not beaverish seems to go 
forth in the shape of talk. To such length is human intellect 
wasted or suppressed in this world ! 

If the young aspirant is not rich enough for Parliament, 
and is deterred by the basilisks or otherwise from entering on 
Law or Church, and cannot altogether reduce his human 
intellect to the beaverish condition, or satisfy himself with 
the prospect of making money, what becomes of him in such 
case, which is naturally the case of very many, and ever of 
more ? In such case there remains but one outlet for him, 
and notably enough that too is a talking one : the outlet of 
Literature, of trying to write Books. Since, owing to pre- 
liminary basilisks, want of cash, or superiority to cash, he 
cannot mount aloft by eloquent talking, let him try it by 
dextrous eloquent writing. Here happily, having three fingers, 
and capital to buy a quire of paper, he can try it to all 
lengths and in spite of all mortals in this career there 
is happily no public impediment that can turn him back ; 
nothing but private starvation, which is itself &Jinis or kind 



v.] STUMP-ORATOR 191 

of goal, can pretend to hinder a British man from prose- 
cuting Literature to the very utmost, and wringing the final 
secret from her : " A talent is in thee ; No talent is in thee." 
To the British subject who fancies genius may be lodged in 
him, this liberty remains ; and truly it is, if well computed, 
almost the only one he has. 

A crowded portal this of Literature, accordingly ! The 
haven of expatriated spiritualisms, and, alas, also of expatriated 
vanities and prurient imbecilities : here do the windy aspira- 
tions, foiled activities, foolish ambitions, and frustrate human 
energies reduced to the vocable condition, fly as to the one 
refuge left ; and the Republic of Letters increases in popula- 
tion at a faster rate than even the Republic of America. 
The strangest regiment in her Majesty's service, this of the 
Soldiers of Literature : would your Lordship much like to 
march through Coventry with them? The immortal gods 
are there (quite irrecognisable under these disguises), and also 
the lowest broken valets ; an extremely miscellaneous regi- 
ment. In fact the regiment, superficially viewed, looks like 
an immeasurable motley flood of discharged playactors, fun- 
ambulists, false prophets, drunken ballad-singers ; and marches 
not as a regiment, but as a boundless canaille, without drill, 
uniform, captaincy or billet; with huge oz^r-proportion of 
drummers ; you would say, a regiment gone wholly to the 
drum, with hardly a good musket to be seen in it, more a 
canaille than a regiment. Canaille of all the loud-sounding 
levities, and general winnowings of Chaos, marching through 
the world in a most ominous manner ; proclaiming, audibly if 
you have ears : " Twelfth hour of the Night ; ancient graves 
yawning ; pale clammy Puseyisms screeching in their winding- 
sheets ; owls busy in the City regions ; many goblins abroad ! 
Awake, ye living ; dream no more ; arise to judgment ! Chaos 
and Gehenna are broken loose ; the Devil with his Bedlams 
must be flung in chains again, and the Last of the Days is 
about to dawn ! " Such is Literature to the reflective soul at 
this moment. 



192 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

But what now concerns us most is the circumstance that 
here too the demand is, Vocables, still vocables. In all 
appointed courses of activity and paved careers for human 
genius, and in this unpaved, unappointed, broadest career of 
Literature, broad way that leadeth to destruction for so 
many, the one duty laid upon you is still, Talk, talk. Talk 
well with pen or tongue, and it shall be well with you ; do 
not talk well, it shall be ill with you. To wag the tongue 
with dextrous acceptability, there is for human worth and 
faculty, in our England of the Nineteenth Century, that one 
method of emergence and no other. Silence, you would say, 
means annihilation for the Englishman of the Nineteenth 
Century. The worth that has not spoken itself, is not ; or 
is potentially only, and as if it were not. Vox is the God of 
this Universe. If you have human intellect, it avails nothing 
unless you either make it into beaverism, or talk with it. 
Make it into beaverism, and gather money ; or else make talk 
with it, and gather what you can. Such is everywhere the 
demand for talk among us ; to which, of course, the supply is 
proportionate. 

From dinners up to woolsacks and divine mitres, here in 
England, much may be gathered by talk ; without talk, of 
the human sort nothing. Is Society become wholly a bag of 
wind, then, ballasted by guineas ? Are our interests in it as 
a sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal ? In Army or Navy, 
when unhappily we have war on hand, there is, almost against 
our will, some kind of demand for certain of the silent talents. 
But in peace, that too passes into mere demand of the ostenta- 
tions, of the pipeclays and the blank cartridges ; and, 
except that Naval men are occasionally, on long voyages, 
forced to hold their tongue, and converse with the dumb 
elements, and illimitable oceans, that moan and rave there 
without you and within you, which is a great advantage to 
the Naval man, our poor United Services have to make 
conversational wind-bags and ostentational paper-lanterns of 
themselves, or do worse, even as the others. 



v.] STUMP-ORATOR 193 

My friends, must I assert, then, what surely all men know, 
though all men seem to have forgotten it, That in the 
learned professions as in the unlearned, and in human things 
throughout, in every place and in every time, the true function 
of intellect is not that of talking, but of understanding and 
discerning with a view to performing ! An intellect may 
easily talk too much, and perform too little. Gradually, if 
it get into the noxious habit of talk, there will less and less 
performance come of it, talk being so delightfully handy in 
comparison with work ; and at last there will no work, or 
thought of work, be got from it at all. Talk, except as the 
preparation for work, is worth almost nothing ; sometimes 
it is worth infinitely less than nothing; and becomes, little 
conscious of playing such a fatal part, the general summary 
of pretentious nothingnesses, and the chief of all the curses 
the Posterity of Adam are liable to in this sublunary world ! 
Would you discover the Atropos of Human Virtue ; the sure 
Destroyer, ' by painless extinction,' of Human Veracities, 
Performances, and Capabilities to perform or to be veracious, 
it is this, you have it here. 

Unwise talk is matchless in unwisdom. Unwise work, if 
it but persist, is everywhere struggling towards correction, 
and restoration to health ; for it is still in contact with 
Nature, and all Nature incessantly contradicts it, and will 
heal it or annihilate it : not so with unwise talk, which 
addresses itself, regardless of veridical Nature, to the universal 
suffrages ; and can, if it be dextrous, find harbour there till 
all the suffrages are bankrupt and gone to Houndsditch, 
Nature not interfering with her protest till then. False 
speech, definable as the acme of unwise speech, is capable, as 
we already said, of becoming the falsest of all things. Falsest 
of all things : and whither will the general deluge of that, 
in Parliament and Synagogue, in Book and Broadside, carry 
you and your affairs, my friend, when once they are embarked 
on it as now ? 



194 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Parliament, Parliamentum, is by express appointment the 
Talking Apparatus; yet not in Parliament either is the 
essential function, by any means, talk. Not to speak your 
opinion well, but to have a good and just opinion worth 
speaking, for every Parliament, as for every man, this latter 
is the point. Contrive to have a true opinion, you will get 
it told in some way, better or worse ; and it will be a blessing 
to all creatures. Have a false opinion, and tell it with the 
tongue of Angels, what can that profit ? The better you tell 
it, the worse it will be ! 

In Parliament and out of Parliament, and everywhere in 
this Universe, your one salvation is, That you can discern 
with just insight, and follow with noble valour, what the law 
of the case before you is, what the appointment of the Maker 
in regard to it has been. Get this out of one man, you are 
saved ; fail to get this out of the most August Parliament 
wrapt in the sheepskins of a thousand years, you are lost, 
your Parliament, and you, and all your sheepskins are lost. 
Beautiful talk is by no means the most pressing want in 
Parliament ! We have had some reasonable modicum of talk 
in Parliament ! What talk has done for us hi Parliament, 
and is now doing, the dullest of us at length begins to see ! 

Much has been said of Parliament's breeding men to busi- 
ness ; of the training an Official Man gets in this school of 
argument and talk. He is here inured to patience, tolerance ; 
sees what is what in the Nation and in the Nation's Govern- 
ment; attains official knowledge, official courtesy and manners; 
in short, is polished at all points into official articulation, 
and here better than elsewhere qualifies himself to be a 
Governor of men. So it is said. Doubtless, I think, he will 
see and suffer much in Parliament, and inure himself to 
several things ; he will, with what eyes he has, gradually see 
Parliament itself, for one thing ; what a high-soaring, help- 
lessly floundering, ever babbling yet inarticulate dark dumb 
Entity it is (certainly one of the strangest under the sun 
just now): which doubtless, if he have in view to get measures 






v.J STUMP-ORATOR 195 

voted there one day, will be an important acquisition for him. 
But as to breeding himself for a Doer of Work, much more 
for a King, or Chief of Doers, here in this element of talk ; 
as to that I confess the fatalest doubts, or rather, alas, I have 
no doubt ! Alas, it is our fatalest misery just now, not 
easily alterable, and yet urgently requiring to be altered, 
That no British man can attain to be a Statesman, or 
Chief of Workers, till he has first proved himself a Chief of 
Talkers: which mode of trial for a Worker, is it not pre- 
cisely, of all the trials you could set him upon, the falsest and 
unfairest ? 

Nay, I doubt much you are not likely ever to meet the 
fittest material for a Statesman, or Chief of Workers, in such 
an element as that. Your Potential Chief of Workers, will 
he come there at all, to try whether he can talk? Your 
poor ten- pound franchisers and electoral world generally, in 
love with eloquent talk, are they the likeliest to discern what 
man it is that has worlds of silent work in him ? No. Or 
is such a man, even if born in the due rank for it, the like- 
liest to present himself, and court their most sweet voices ? 
Again, no. 

The Age that admires talk so much can have little discern- 
ment for inarticulate work, or for anything that is deep and 
genuine. Nobody, or hardly anybody, having in himself an 
earnest sense for truth, how can anybody recognise an in- 
articulate Veracity, or Nature-fact of any kind ; a Human 
Doer especially, who is the most complex, profound, and 
inarticulate of all Nature's Facts ? Nobody can recognise 
him : till once he is patented, get some public stamp of 
authenticity, and has been articulately proclaimed, and 
asserted to be a Doer. To the worshipper of talk, such a 
one is a sealed book. An excellent human soul, direct from 
Heaven, how shall any excellence of man become recog- 
nisable to this unfortunate ? Not except by announcing and 
placarding itself as excellent, which, I reckon, it above other 
things will probably be in no great haste to do. 



196 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Wisdom, the divine message which every soul of man 
brings into this world ; the divine prophecy of what the new 
man has got the new and peculiar capability to do, is in- 
trinsically of silent nature. It cannot at once, or completely 
at all, be read-off in words ; for it is written in abstruse facts, 
of endowment, position, desire, opportunity, granted to the 
man ; interprets itself in presentiments, vague struggles, 
passionate endeavours ; and is only legible in whole when his 
work is done. Not by the noble monitions of Nature, but by 
the ignoble, is a man much tempted to publish the secret of 
his soul in words. Words, if he have a secret, will be forever 
inadequate to it. Words do but disturb the real answer of 
fact which could be given to it ; disturb, obstruct, and will in 
the end abolish, and render impossible, said answer. No 
grand Doer in this world can be a copious speaker about his 
doings. William the Silent spoke himself best in a country 
liberated ; Oliver Cromwell did not shine in rhetoric ; Goethe, 
when he had but a book in view, found that he must say 
nothing even of that, if it was to succeed with him. 

Then as to politeness, and breeding to business. An 
official man must be bred to business ; of course he must : 
and not for essence only, but even for the manners of office 
he requires breeding. Besides his intrinsic faculty, whatever 
that may be, he must be cautious, vigilant, discreet, above 
all things, he must be reticent, patient, polite. Certain of 
these qualities are by nature imposed upon men of station ; 
and they are trained from birth to some exercise of them : 
this constitutes their one intrinsic qualification for office ; 
this is their one advantage in the New Downing Street pro- 
jected for this New Era ; and it will not go for much in that 
Institution. One advantage, or temporary advantage ; 
against which there are so many counterbalances. It is the 
indispensable preliminary for office, but by no means the 
complete outfit, a miserable outfit where there is nothing 
farther. 

Will your Lordship give me leave to say that, practically, 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 197 

the intrinsic qualities will presuppose these preliminaries too, 
but by no means vice versa. That, on the whole, if you have 
got the intrinsic qualities, you have got everything, and the 
preliminaries will prove attainable ; but that if you have got 
only the preliminaries, you have yet got nothing. A man of 
real dignity will not find it impossible to bear himself in a 
dignified manner; a man of real understanding and insight 
will get to know, as the fruit of his very first study, what the 
laws of his situation are, and will conform to these. Rough 
old Samuel Johnson, blustering Boreas and rugged Arctic 
Bear as he often was, defined himself, justly withal, as a polite 
man : a noble manful attitude of soul is his ; a clear, true 
and loyal sense of what others are, and what he himself is, 
shines through the rugged coating of him; comes out as 
grave deep rhythmus when his King honours him, and he will 
not * bandy compliments with his King ' ; is traceable too in 
his indignant trampling-down of the Chesterfield patronages, 
tailor-made insolences, and contradictions of sinners; which 
may be called his revolutionary movements, hard and per- 
emptory by the law of them ; these could not be soft like 
his constitutional ones, when men and kings took him for 
somewhat like the thing he was. Given a noble man, I 
think your Lordship may expect by and by a polite man. 
No * politer ' man was to be found in Britain than the rustic 
Robert Burns : high duchesses were captivated with the 
chivalrous ways of the man ; recognised that here was the 
true chivalry, and divine nobleness of bearing, as indeed they 
well might, now when the Peasant God and Norse Thor had 
come down among them again ! Chivalry this, if not as they 
do chivalry in Drury Lane or West-End drawing-rooms, yet 
as they do it in Valhalla and the General Assembly of the 
Gods. 

For indeed, who invented chivalry, politeness, or anything 
that is noble and melodious and beautiful among us, except 
precisely the like of Johnson and of Burns ? The select few 
who in the generations of this world were wise and valiant, 



198 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

they, in spite of all the tremendous majority of blockheads 
and slothful belly-worshippers, and noisy ugly persons, have 
devised whatsoever is noble in the manners of man to man. 
I expect they will learn to be polite, your Lordship, when you 
give them a chance ! Nor is it as a school of human culture, 
for this or for any other grace or gift, that Parliament will 
be found first-rate or indispensable. As experience in the 
river is indispensable to the ferryman, so is knowledge of his 
Parliament to the British Peel or Chatham ; so was know- 
ledge of the (Eil-de-Bceuf to the French Choiseul. Where 
and how said river, whether Parliament with Wilkeses, or 
CEil-de-Bceuf with Pompadours, can be waded, boated, swum ; 
how the miscellaneous cargoes, * measures ' so-called, can be 
got across it, according to their kinds, and landed alive on 
the hither side as facts : we have all of us our ferries in this 
world ; and must know the river and its ways, or get drowned 
some day ! In that sense, practice in Parliament is indis- 
pensable to the British Statesman ; but not in any other 
sense. 

A school, too, of manners and of several other things, the 
Parliament will doubtless be to the aspirant Statesman ; a 
school better or worse; as the CEil-de-Boeuf likewise was, and 
as all scenes where men work or live are sure to be. Especially 
where many men work together, the very rubbing against one 
another will grind and polish off their angularities into round- 
ness, into * politeness' after a sort; and the official man, 
place him how you may, will never want for schooling, of 
extremely various kinds. A first-rate school one cannot call 
this Parliament for him ; I fear to say what rate at present ! 
In so far as it teaches him vigilance, patience, courage, tough- 
ness of lungs or of soul, and skill in any kind of swimming, 
it is a good school. In so far as it forces him to speak where 
Nature orders silence ; and even, lest all the world should 
learn his secret (which often enough would kill his secret, and 
little profit the world), forces him to speak falsities, vague 
ambiguities, and the froth-dialect usual in Parliaments in 



v.J STUMP-ORATOR 199 

these times, it may be considered one of the worst schools 
ever devised by man ; and, I think, may almost challenge the 
(Eil-de-Boeuf to match it in badness. 

Parliament will train your men to the manners required 
of a statesman ; but in a much less degree to the intrinsic 
functions of one. To these latter, it is capable of wwstraining 
as nothing else can. Parliament will train you to talk ; and 
above all things to hear, with patience, unlimited quantities 
of foolish talk. To tell a good story for yourself, and to 
make it appear that you have done your work : this, especially 
in constitutional countries, is something; and yet in all 
countries, constitutional ones too, it is intrinsically nothing, 
probably even less. For it is not the function of any mortal, 
in Downing Street or elsewhere here below, to wag the 
tongue of him, and make it appear that he has done work ; 
but to wag some quite other organs of him, and to do work ; 
there is no danger of his work's appearing by and by. Such 
an accomplishment, even in constitutional countries, I grieve 
to say, may become much less than nothing. Have you at all 
computed how much less? The human creature who has 
once given way to satisfying himself with 'appearances,' to 
seeking his salvation in * appearances,' the moral life of such 
human creature is rapidly bleeding out of him. Depend 
upon it, Beelzebub, Satan, or however you may name the too 
authentic Genius of Eternal Death, has got that human 
creature in his claws. By and by you will have a dead 
parliamentary bagpipe, and your living man fled away without 
return ! 

Such parliamentary bagpipes I myself have heard play 
tunes, much to the satisfaction of the people. Every tune 
lies within their compass ; and their mind (for they still call 
it mind) is ready as a hurdygurdy on turning of the handle : 

" My Lords, this question now before the House " Ye 

Heavens, O ye divine Silences, was there in the womb of 
Chaos, then, such a product, liable to be evoked by human 
art, as that same ? While the galleries were all applausive 



200 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

of heart, and the Fourth Estate looked with eyes enlightened, 
as if you had touched its lips with a staff dipped in honey, 
I have sat with reflections too ghastly to be uttered. A poor 
human creature and learned friend, once possessed of many 
fine gifts, possessed of intellect, veracity, and manful conviction 
on a variety of objects, has he now lost all that ; converted 
all that into a glistering phosphorescence which can show 
itself on the outside ; while within, all is dead, chaotic, dark ; 
a painted sepulchre full of dead-men's bones ! Discernment, 
knowledge, intellect, in the human sense of the words, this 
man has now none. His opinion you do not ask on any 
matter : on the matter he has no opinion, judgment, or 
insight ; only on what may be said about the matter, how 
it may be argued of, what tune may be played upon it to 
enlighten the eyes of the Fourth Estate. 

Such a soul, though to the eye he still keeps tumbling 
about in the Parliamentary element, and makes * motions, 1 
and passes bills, for aught I know, are we to define him as 
a living one, or as a dead ? Partridge the Almanac-maker, 
whose * publications ' still regularly appear, is known to be 
dead ! The dog that was drowned last summer, and that 
floats up and down the Thames with ebb and flood ever since, 
is it not dead ? Alas, in the hot months, you meet here 
and there such a floating dog ; and at length, if you often 
use the river steamers, get to know him by sight. " There 
he is again, still astir there in his quasi-stygian element ! " 
you dejectedly exclaim (perhaps reading your Morning News- 
paper at the moment) ; and reflect, with a painful oppression 
of nose and imagination, on certain completed professors of 
parliamentary eloquence in modern times. Dead long since, 
but not resting ; daily doing motions in that Westminster 
region still, daily from Vauxhall to Blackfriars, and back 
again ; and cannot get away at all ! Daily (from Newspaper 
or river steamer) you may see him at some point of his fated 
course, hovering in the eddies, stranded in the ooze, or rapidly 
progressing with flood or ebb ; and daily the odour of him is 



V.J STUMP-ORATOR 201 

getting more intolerable ; daily the condition of him appeals 
more tragically to gods and men. 



Nature admits no lie ; most men profess to be aware of 
this, but few in any measure lay it to heart. Except in the 
departments of mere material manipulation, it seems to be 
taken practically as if this grand truth were merely a polite 
flourish of rhetoric. What is a lie ? The question is worth 
asking, once and away, by the practical English mind. 

A voluntary spoken divergence from the fact as it stands, 
as it has occurred and will proceed to develop itself: this 
clearly, if adopted by any man, will so far forth wzwlead him 
in all practical dealing with the fact ; till he cast that state- 
ment out of him, and reject it as an unclean poisonous thing, 
he can have no success in dealing with the fact. If such 
spoken divergence from the truth be involuntary, we lament it 
as a misfortune ; and are entitled, at least the speaker of it is, 
to lament it extremely as the most palpable of all misfortunes, 
as the indubitablest losing of his way, and turning aside from 
the goal instead of pressing towards it, in the race set before 
him. If the divergence is voluntary, there superadds itself 
to our sorrow a just indignation : we call the voluntary spoken 
divergence a lie, and justly abhor it as the essence of human 
treason and baseness, the desertion of a man to the Enemy of 
men against himself and his brethren. A lost deserter ; who 
has gone over to the Enemy, called Satan ; and cannot but be 
lost in the adventure ! Such is every liar with the tongue ; 
and such in all nations is he, at all epochs, considered. Men 
pull his nose, and kick him out of doors ; and by peremptory 
expressive methods signify that they can and will have no 
trade with him. Such is spoken divergence from the fact ; 
so fares it with the practiser of that sad art. 

But have we well considered a divergence in thought from 
what is the fact ? Have we considered the man whose very 



202 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

thought is a lie to him and to us ! He too is a frightful 
man ; repeating about this Universe on every hand what is 
not, and driven to repeat it ; the sure herald of ruin to all 
that follow him, that know with his knowledge ! And would 
you learn how to get a mendacious thought, there is no surer 
recipe than carrying a loose tongue. The lying thought, you 
already either have it, or will soon get it by that method. 
He who lies with his very tongue, he clearly enough has long 
ceased to think truly in his mind. Does he, in any sense, 
* think ' ? All his thoughts and imaginations, if they extend 
beyond mere beaverisms, astucities and sensualisms, are false, 
incomplete, perverse, untrue even to himself. He has become 
a false mirror of this Universe ; not a small mirror only, but 
a crooked, bedimmed and utterly deranged one. But all loose 
tongues too are akin to lying ones ; are insincere at the best, 
and go rattling with little meaning; the thought lying 
languid at a great distance behind them, if thought there be 
behind them at all. Gradually there will be none or little ! 
How can the thought of such a man, what he calls thought, 
be other than false ? 

Alas, the palpable liar with his tongue does at least know 
that he is lying, and has or might have some faint vestige of 
remorse and chance of amendment ; but the impalpable liar, 
whose tongue articulates mere accepted commonplaces, cants 
and babblement, which means only, " Admire me, call me an 
excellent stump-orator ! "" of him what hope is there ? His 
thought, what thought he had, lies dormant, inspired only to 
invent vocables and plausibilities ; while the tongues goes so 
glib, the thought is absent, gone a- woolgathering ; getting 
itself drugged with the applausive * Hear, hear ! ' what will 
become of such a man ? His idle thought has run all to 
seed, and grown false and the giver of falsities ; the inner 
light of his mind has gone out ; all his light is mere putridity 
and phosphorescence henceforth. Whosoever is in quest 
of ruin, let him with assurance follow that man ; he or no 
one is on the right road to it. 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 203 

Good Heavens, from the wisest Thought of a man to the 
actual truth of a Thing as it lies in Nature, there is, one 
would suppose, a sufficient interval I Consider it, and what 
other intervals we introduce ! The faithfulest, most glowing 
word of a man is but an imperfect image of the thought, such 
as it is, that dwells within him ; his best word will never but 
with error convey his thought to other minds : and then 
between his poor thought and Nature's Fact, which is the 
Thought of the Eternal, there may be supposed to lie some 
discrepancies, some shortcomings ! Speak your sincerest, 
think your wisest, there is still a great gulf between you and 
the fact. And now, do not speak your sincerest, and, what 
will inevitably follow out of that, do not think your wisest, 
but think only your plausiblest, your showiest for parlia- 
mentary purposes, where will you land with that guidance ? 
I invite the British Parliament, and all the Parliamentary 
and other Electors of Great Britain, to reflect on this till 
they have well understood it ; and then to ask, each of him- 
self, What probably the horoscopes of the British Parliament, 
at this epoch of World-History, may be ? 

Fail, by any sin or any misfortune, to discover what the 
truth of the fact is, you are lost so far as that fact goes ! If 
your thought do not image truly but do image falsely the fact, 
you will vainly try to work upon the fact. The fact will not 
obey you, the fact will silently resist you ; and ever, with 
silent invincibility, will go on resisting you, till you do get to 
image it truly instead of falsely. No help for you whatever, 
except in attaining to a true image of the fact. Needless to 
vote a false image true ; vote it, revote it by overwhelming 
majorities, by jubilant unanimities and universalities ; read it 
thrice or three hundred times, pass acts of parliament upon 
it till the Statute-book can hold no more, it helps not a 
whit : the thing is not so, the thing is otherwise than so ; 
and Adam's whole Posterity, voting daily on it till the world 
finish, will not alter it a jot. Can the sublimest sanhedrim, 
constitutional parliament, or other Collective Wisdom of the 



204 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

world, persuade fire not to burn, sulphuric acid to be sweet 
milk, or the Moon to become green cheese? The fact is 
much the reverse : and even the Constitutional British 
Parliament abstains from such arduous attempts as these 
latter in the voting line ; and leaves the multiplication-table, 
the chemical, mechanical, and other qualities of material 
substances to take their own course; being aware that 
voting and perorating, and reporting in Hansard, will not in 
the least alter any of these. Which is indisputably wise of 
the British Parliament. 

Unfortunately the British Parliament does not, at present, 
quite know that all manner of things and relations of things, 
spiritual equally with material, all manner of qualities, 
entities, existences whatsoever, in this strange visible and 
invisible Universe, are equally inflexible of nature ; that they 
will, one and all, with precisely the same obstinacy, continue 
to obey their own law, not our law ; deaf as the adder to all 
charm of parliamentary eloquence, and of voting never so 
often repeated ; silently, but inflexibly and forevermore, 
declining to change themselves, even as sulphuric acid declines 
to become sweet milk, though you vote so to the end of the 
world. This, it sometimes seems to me, is not quite suffi- 
ciently laid hold of by the British and other Parliaments just 
at present. Which surely is a great misfortune to said 
Parliaments ! For, it would appear, the grand point, after 
all constitutional improvements, and such wagging of wigs in 
Westminster as there has been, is precisely what it was before 
any constitution was yet heard of, or the first official wig had 
budded out of nothing : namely, to ascertain what the truth 
of your question, in Nature, really is ! Verily so. In this 
time and place, as in all past and in all future times and 
places. Today in St. Stephen's, where constitutional, philan- 
thropical, and other great things lie in the mortarkit ; even 
as on the Plain of Shinar long ago, where a certain Tower, 
likewise of a very philanthropic nature, indeed one of the 
desirablest towers I ever heard of, was to be built, but 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 205 

couldn't ! My friends, I do not laugh ; truly I am more 
inclined to weep. 

Get, by six-hundred and fifty-eight votes, or by no vote at 
all, by the silent intimation of your own eyesight and under- 
standing given you direct out of Heaven, and more sacred to 
you than anything earthly, and than all things earthly, a 
correct image of the fact in question, as God and Nature have 
made it : that is the one thing needful ; with that it shall be 
well with you in whatsoever you have to do with said fact. 
Get, by the sublimest constitutional methods, belauded by all 
the world, an incorrect image of the fact : so shall it be other 
than well with you ; so shall you have laud from able-editors 
and vociferous masses of mistaken human creatures ; and from 
the Nature's Fact, continuing quite silently the same as it was, 
contradiction, and that only. What else? Will Nature 
change, or sulphuric acid become sweet milk, for the noise of 
vociferous blockheads ? Surely not. Nature, I assure you, 
has not the smallest intention of doing so. 

On the contrary, Nature keeps silently a most exact Savings- 
bank, and official register, correct to the most evanescent 
item, Debtor and Creditor, in respect to one and all of us ; 
silently marks down, Creditor by such and such an unseen act of 
veracity and heroism ; Debtor to such a loud blustery blunder, 
twenty-seven million strong or one unit strong, and to all 
acts and words and thoughts executed in consequence of that, 
Debtor, Debtor, Debtor, day after day, rigorously as Fate 
(for this is Fate that is writing) ; and at the end of the 
account you will have it all to pay, my friend ; there is the 
rub ! Not the infinitesimalist fraction of a farthing but will 
be found marked there, for you and against you ; and with 
the due rate of interest you will have to pay it, neatly, 
completely, as sure as you are alive. You will have to pay 
it even in money if you live : and, poor slave, do you think 
there is no payment but in money ? There is a payment 
which Nature rigorously exacts of men, and also of Nations, 
and this I think when her wrath is sternest, in the shape 



206 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

of dooming you to possess money. To possess it ; to have 
your bloated vanities fostered into monstrosity by it, your foul 
passions blown into explosion by it, your heart and perhaps 
your very stomach ruined with intoxication by it ; your 
poor life and all its manifold activities stunned into frenzy 
and comatose sleep by it, in one word, as the old Prophets 
said, your soul forever lost by it. Your soul ; so that, through 
the Eternities, you shall have no soul, or manful trace of ever 
having had a soul ; but only, for certain fleeting moments, 
shall have had a moneybag, and have given soul and heart 
and (frightfuler still) stomach itself in fateful exchange for 
the same. You wretched mortal, stumbling about in a God's 
Temple, and thinking it a brutal Cookery-shop ! Nature, 
when her scorn of a slave is divinest, and blazes like the 
blinding lightning against his slavehood, often enough flings 
him a bag of money, silently saying : " That ! Away ; thy 
doom is that ! " 

For no man, and for no body or biggest multitude of men, 
has Nature favour, if they part company with her facts and 
her. Excellent stump-orator ; eloquent parliamentary dead- 
dog, making motions, passing bills ; reported in the Morning 
Newspapers, and reputed the ' best speaker going ' ? From 
the Universe of Fact he has turned himself away ; he is gone 
into partnership with the Universe of Phantasm ; finds it 
profitablest to deal in forged-notes, while the foolish shop- 
keepers will accept them. Nature for such a man, and for 
Nations that follow such, has her patibulary forks, and 
prisons of death everlasting : dost thou doubt it ? Unhappy 
mortal, Nature otherwise were herself a Chaos and no Cosmos. 
Nature was not made by an Impostor ; not she, I think, rife 
as they are ! In fact, by money or otherwise, to the utter- 
most fraction of a calculable and incalculable value, we have, 
each one of us, to settle the exact balance in the abovesaid 
Savings-bank, or official register kept by Nature : Creditor 
by the quantity of veracities we have done, Debtor by the 
quantity of falsities and errors ; there is not, by any con- 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 207 

ceivable device, the faintest hope of escape from that issue 
for one of us, nor for all of us. 

This used to be a well-known fact; and daily still, in 
certain edifices, steeple-houses, joss-houses, temples sacred or 
other, everywhere spread over the world, we hear some dim 
mumblement of an assertion that such is still, what it was 
always and will forever be, the fact : but meseems it has 
terribly fallen out of memory nevertheless ; and, from Dan to 
Beersheba, one in vain looks out for a man that really in his 
heart believes it. In his heart he believes, as we perceive, 
that scrip will yield dividends : but that Heaven too has an 
office of account, and unerringly marks down, against us or 
for us, whatsoever thing we do or say or think, and treasures 
up the same in regard to every creature, this I do not so 
well perceive that he believes. Poor blockhead, no : he 
reckons that all payment is in money, or approximately 
representable by money ; finds money go a strange course ; 
disbelieves the parson and his Day of Judgment ; discerns not 
that there is any judgment except in the small or big debt 
court : and lives (for the present) on that strange footing in 
this Universe. The unhappy mortal, what is the use of his 
' civilisations ' and his * useful knowledges,' if he have for- 
gotten that beginning of human knowledge ; the earliest 
perception of the awakened human soul in this world ; the 
first dictate of Heaven's inspiration to all men? I cannot 
account him a man any more; but only a kind of human 
beaver, who has acquired the art of ciphering. He lives 
without rushing hourly towards suicide, because his soul, 
with all its noble aspirations and imaginations, is sunk at the 
bottom of his stomach, and lies torpid there, unaspiring, 
unimagining, unconsidering, as if it were the vital principle 
of a mere yowr-footed beaver. A soul of a man, appointed 
for spinning cotton and making money, or, alas, for merely 
shooting grouse and gathering rent ; to whom Eternity and 
Immortality, and all human Noblenesses and divine Facts that 
did not tell upon the stock-exchange, were meaningless fables, 



208 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

empty as the inarticulate wind. He will recover out of that 
persuasion one day, or be ground to powder, I believe ! 

To such a pass, by our beaverisms and our mammonisms ; 
by canting of ' prevenient grace ' everywhere, and so boarding 
and lodging our poor souls upon supervenient moonshine 
everywhere, for centuries long ; by our sordid stupidities and 
our idle babblings ; through faith in the divine Stump-Orator, 
and Constitutional Palaver, or august Sanhedrim of Orators, 
have men and Nations been reduced, in this sad epoch ! 
I cannot call them happy Nations ; I must call them Nations 
like to perish ; Nations that will either begin to recover, or 
else soon die. Recovery is to be hoped ; yes, since there 
is in Nature an Almighty Beneficence, and His voice, divinely 
terrible, can be heard in the world-whirlwind now, even as 
from of old and forevermore. Recovery, or else destruction 
and annihilation, is very certain ; and the crisis, too, comes 
rapidly on : but by Stump-Orator and Constitutional Palaver, 
however perfected, my hopes of recovery have long vanished. 
Not by them, I should imagine, but by something far the 
reverse of them, shall we return to truth and God ! 

I tell you, the ignoble intellect cannot think the truth, 
even within its own limits, and when it seriously tries ! And 
of the ignoble intellect that does not seriously try, and has 
even reached the * ignobleness ' of seriously trying the reverse, 
and of lying with its very tongue, what are we to expect ? 
It is frightful to consider. Sincere wise speech is but an 
imperfect corollary, and insignificant outer manifestation, of 
sincere wise thought. He whose very tongue utters falsities, 
what has his heart long been doing ? The thought of his 
heart is not its wisest, not even its wisest ; it is its foolishest ; 
and even of that we have a false and foolish copy. And 
it is Nature's Fact, or the Thought of the Eternal, which we 
want to arrive at in regard to the matter, which if we do 
not arrive at, we shall not save the matter, we shall drive the 
matter into shipwreck ! 

The practice of modern Parliaments, with reporters sitting 



V.J STUMP-ORATOR 209 

among them, and twenty-seven millions mostly fools listening 
to them, fills me with amazement. In regard to no thing, or 
fact as God and Nature have made it, can you get so much 
as the real thought of any honourable head, even so far as 
it, the said honourable head, still has capacity of thought. 
What the honourable gentleman's wisest thought is or would 
have been, had he led from birth a life of piety and earnest 
veracity and heroic virtue, you, and he himself poor deep- 
sunk creature, vainly conjecture as from immense dim distances 
far in the rear of what he is led to say. And again, far in 
the rear of what his thought is, surely long infinitudes 
beyond all he could ever think, lies the Thought of God 
Almighty, the Image itself of the Fact, the thing you are 
in quest of, and must find or do worse ! Even his, the 
honourable gentleman's, actual bewildered, falsified, vague 
surmise or quasi-thought, even this is not given you ; but 
only some falsified copy of this, such as he fancies may suit 
the reporters and twenty-seven millions mostly fools. And 

upon that latter you are to act ; with what success, do 

you expect ? That is the thought you are to take for the 
Thought of the Eternal Mind, that double-distilled falsity 
of a blockheadism from one who is false even as a blockhead ! 
Do I make myself plain to Mr. Peter's understanding ? 
Perhaps it will surprise him less that parliamentary eloquence 
excites more wonder than admiration in me ; that the fate of 
countries governed by that sublime alchemy does not appear 
the hopefulest just now. Not by that method, I should appre- 
hend, will the Heavens be scaled and the Earth vanquished ; 
not by that, but by another. 

A benevolent man once proposed to me, but without 
pointing out the methods how, this plan of reform for our 
benighted world : To cut from one generation, whether the 
current one or the next, all the tongues away, prohibiting 
Literature too ; and appoint at least one generation to pass 
its life in silence. "There, thou one blessed generation, 

o 



210 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

from the vain jargon of babble thou art beneficently freed. 
Whatsoever of truth, traditionary or original, thy own god- 
given intellect shall point-out to thee as true, that thou wilt 
go and do. In doing of it there will be a verdict for thee ; 
if a verdict of True, thou wilt hold by it, and ever again do it ; 
if of Untrue, thou wilt never try it more, but be eternally 
delivered from it. To do aught because the vain hearsays 
order thee, and the big clamours of the sanhedrim of fools, 
is not thy lot, what worlds of misery are spared thee ! 
Nature's voice heard in thy own inner being, and the sacred 
Commandment of thy Maker : these shall be thy guidances, 
thou happy tongueless generation. What is good and 
beautiful thou shalt know ; not merely what is said to be 
so. Not to talk of thy doings, and become the envy of 
surrounding flunkies, but to taste of the fruit of thy doings 
themselves, is thine. What the Eternal Laws will sanction 
for thee, do; what the Froth Gospels and multitudinous 
long-eared Hearsays never so loudly bid, all this is already 
chaff for thee, drifting rapidly along, thou knowest whither- 
ward, on the eternal winds. 11 

Good Heavens, if such a plan were practicable, how the 
chaff might be winnowed out of every man, and out of all 
human things ; and ninety-nine hundredths of our whole big 
Universe, spiritual and practical, might blow itself away, as 
mere torrents of chaff; whole trade- winds of chaff, many 
miles deep, rushing continually with the voice of whirlwinds 
towards a certain FIEE, which knows how to deal with it ! 
Ninety-nine hundredths blown away ; all the lies blown away, 
and some skeleton of a spiritual and practical Universe left 
standing for us which were true : O Heavens, is it forever 
impossible, then ? By a generation that had no tongue 
it really might be done; but not so easily by one that 
had. Tongues, platforms, parliaments, and fourth-estates ; 
unfettered presses, periodical and stationary literatures : we 
are nearly all gone to tongue, I think ; and our fate is very 
questionable ! 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 211 

Truly, it is little known at present, and ought forthwith to 
become better known, what ruin to all nobleness and fruit- 
fulness and blessedness in the genius of a poor mortal you 
generally bring about, by ordering him to speak, to do all 
things with a view to their being seen ! Few good and 
fruitful things ever were done, or could be done, on those 
terms. Silence, silence ; and be distant ye profane, with your 
jargonings and superficial babblements, when a man has any- 
thing to do \ Eye-service, dost thou know what that is, 
poor England ? eye-service is all the man can do in these 
sad circumstances ; grows to be all he has the idea of doing, 
of his or any other man's ever doing, or ever having done, 
in any circumstances. Sad enough. Alas, it is our saddest 
woe of all; too sad for being spoken of at present, while 
all or nearly all men consider it an imaginary sorrow on my 
part ! 

Let the young English soul, in whatever logic-shop and 
nonsense-verse establishment of an Eton, Oxford, Edinburgh, 
Halle, Salamanca, or other High Finishing-School, he may 
be getting his young idea taught how to speak and spout, and 
print sermons and review-articles, and thereby show himself 
and fond patrons that it is an idea, lay this solemnly to 
heart ; this is my deepest counsel to him ! The idea you 
have once spoken, if it even were an idea, is no longer yours ; 
it is gone from you, so much life and virtue is gone, and the 
vital circulations of your self and your destiny and activity 
are henceforth deprived of it. If you could not get it 
spoken, if you could still constrain it into silence, so much 
the richer are you. Better keep your idea while you can : let 
it still circulate in your blood, and there fructify ; inarticu- 
lately inciting you to good activities ; giving to your whole 
spiritual life a ruddier health. When the time does come 
for speaking it, you will speak it all the more concisely, the 
more expressively, appropriately ; and if such a time should 
never come, have you not already acted it, and uttered it as no 
words can? Think of this, my young friend; for there is 



212 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

nothing truer, nothing more forgotten in these shabby gold- 
laced days. Incontinence is half of all the sins of man. 
And among the many kinds of that base vice, I know none 
baser, or at present half so fell and fatal, as that same 
Incontinence of Tongue. * Public speaking, 1 ' parliamentary 
eloquence ' : it is a Moloch, before whom young souls are 
made to pass through the fire. They enter, weeping or 
rejoicing, fond parents consecrating them to the redhot Idol, 
as to the Highest God : and they come out spiritually dead. 
Dead enough ; to live thenceforth a galvanic life of mere 
Stump-Oratory; screeching and gibbering, words without 
wisdom, without veracity, without conviction more than 
skin-deep. A divine gift, that ? It is a thing admired by 
the vulgar, and rewarded with seats in the Cabinet and 
other preciosities ; but to the wise, it is a thing not admir- 
able, not adorable ; unmelodious rather, and ghastly and 
bodeful, as the speech of sheeted spectres in the streets at 
midnight ! 

Be not a Public Orator, thou brave young British man, 
thou that art now growing to be something : not a Stump- 
Orator, if thou canst help it. Appeal not to the vulgar, 
with its long ears and its seats in the Cabinet ; not by spoken 
words to the vulgar ; hate the profane vulgar, and bid it be- 
gone. Appeal by silent work, by silent suffering if there be 
no work, to the gods, who have nobler than seats in the 
Cabinet for thee ! Talent for Literature, thou hast such a 
talent ? Believe it not, be slow to believe it ! To speak, or 
to write, Nature did not peremptorily order thee; but to 
work she did. And know this : there never was a talent even 
for real Literature, not to speak of talents lost and damned in 
doing sham Literature, but was primarily a talent for some- 
thing infinitely better of the silent kind. Of Literature, in 
all ways, be shy rather than otherwise, at present ! There 
where thou art, work, work ; whatsoever thy hand findeth to 
do, do it, with the hand of a man, not of a phantasm ; be 



V.] STUMP-ORATOR 213 

that thy unnoticed blessedness and exceeding great reward. 
Thy words, let them be few, and well-ordered. Love silence 
rather than speech in these tragic days, whenj for very speak- 
ing, the voice of man has fallen inarticulate to man; and 
hearts, in this loud babbling, sit dark and dumb toward one 
another. Witty, above all, O be not witty : none of us is 
bound to be witty, under penalties ; to be wise and true we 
all are, under the terriblest penalties ! 

Brave young friend, dear to me, and known too in a sense, 
though never seen, nor to be seen by me, you are, what I 
am not, in the happy case to learn to be something and to do 
something, instead of eloquently talking about what has been 
and was done and may be ! The old are what they are, and 
will not alter ; our hope is in you. England's hope, and the 
world's, is that there may once more be millions such, instead 
of units as now. Macte ; i fausto pede. And may future 
generations, acquainted again with the silences, and once more 
cognisant of what is noble and faithful and divine, look back 
on us with pity and incredulous astonishment ! 



No. VI 
PARLIAMENTS 

[In JUNE 1860] 

BY this time it is sufficiently apparent the present Editor ia 
not one of those who expect to see the Country saved by 
farther 'reforming' the reformed Parliament we have got. 
On the contrary, he has the sad conviction that from such 
Parliament never so ingeniously reformed, there can no salva- 
tion come, but only a speedy finale far different from salvation. 
It is his effort and desire to teach this and the other thinking 
British man that said finale, the advent namely of actual 
open Anarchy, cannot be distant, now when virtual disguised 
Anarchy, long-continued and waxing daily, has got to such 
a height ; and that the one method of staving-off that fatal 
consummation, and steering towards the Continents of the 
Future, lies not in the direction of reforming Parliament, but 
of what he calls reforming Downing Street ; a thing infinitely 
urgent to be begun, and to be strenuously carried on. To 
find a Parliament more and more the express image of the 
People, could, unless the People chanced to be wise as well as 
miserable, give him no satisfaction. Not this at all ; but to 
find some sort of King, made in the image of God, who 
could a little achieve for the People, if not their spoken wishes, 
yet their dumb wants, and what they would at last find to 
have been their instinctive will, which is a far different 
matter usually, in this babbling world of ours. 

Qualification movement, universal-suffrage movement, Re- 
form Association, and suchlike, this Editor does not enjoin 
upon his readers ; his readers whom (as every crow is known 
to think her own eggs whitest) he considers to be a select 
class, the true Aristocracy of England, capable of far better 



214 



NO. vi.J PARLIAMENTS 215 

things than these. Which better things, and not the worse, 
it is his heart's wish to urge them upon doing. And yet, 
alas, how can he forbid any reader of his, or of other people's, 
to join such suffrage movement, or still more distracted 
Chartism of Six Points, if it seem hopeful ? Where we are, 
is no continuing. Men say : " The finale must come, ought 
to come ; perhaps the sooner it comes, it will be the lighter 
to bear. If the foul universal boil is to go on ripening, 
under mere Leave-alone and Premiers of the Phantasm order, 
perhaps the sooner it bursts, and declares itself as universal 
gangrene and social death, the better ! " Good Heavens, 
have men computed what the bursting-out of virtual dis- 
guised Anarchy into open undeniable Anarchy, such as they 
have in the Continental countries just now, amounts to in 
human affairs ; what a game that of trying for cure in the 
Medea's-caldron of Revolution is ! Must we also front the 
Apotheosis of Attorneyism ; and know what the blackest 
of terrestrial curses means ? 

But if the captains of the ship are of that scandalous class 
who refuse to be warned except by iceberg counsellors nudging 
them, what are the miserable crew to do? Yes, the crew 
had better consider of that; they have greatly too little 
considered it of late. They will find that in Nature there 
is no such alarming creature as a Chief Governor of that 
humour, in getting round a Cape Horn like this of ours ; 
that, if pity did not check our rage, there is no such traitor 
in the ship as this unconscious one ! Who, placidly assured, 
nothing doubting but he is the friend of gods and men, can 
stand with imperturbable attitude, quietly steering, by his 
old Whig and other charts of the British Channel (as if we 
were still there or thereabouts), into the yawning mouth of 
Chaos, on the other side of the world ; and call it passing 
the Forelands in rough weather, or getting into Cowes, by 
constitutional methods, and ' remedial measures suited to the 
occasion. 1 Our heart's prayer in those circumstances is : 
From such Chief Governors, good Lord deliver us ! And if 



216 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

masses of the desperate common men before the mast do 
invoke Chartism rather, and invite the iceberg counsellors to 
nudge him, cannot we too well understand it ? I hope, in 
other quarters of the ship there are men who know wiser 
courses, and instead of inviting the iceberg counsellors and 
Six Points, will direct all their strength to fling the 
Phantasm Captain under hatches. It is with the view of 
aiding and encouraging these latter that we now institute a 
few considerations upon Parliaments generally. 

Dryasdust in his lumber-masses, which he calls treatises 
and histories, has not been explicit about Parliaments : but 
we need not doubt, the English Parliament, as windy a 
palavering and imaginary entity as it has now grown to be, 
was at one time a quite solid serious actuality, met for earnest 
despatch of work which, on the King's part and the Common- 
wealth's, needed absolutely to be done. Reading in Eadmerua 
and the dim old Books, one finds gradually that the Parlia- 
ment was at first a most simple Assemblage, quite cognate to 
the situation ; that Red William, or whoever had taken on 
him the terrible task of being King in England, was wont to 
invite, oftenest about Christmas time, his subordinate Kinglets, 
Barons as he called them, to give him the pleasure of their 
company for a week or two : there, in earnest conference all 
morning, in freer talk over Christmas cheer all evening, in 
some big royal Hall of Westminster, Winchester, or where- 
ever it might be, with log-fires, huge rounds of roast and 
boiled, not lacking malmsey and other generous liquor, they 
took counsel concerning the arduous matters of the kingdom. 
*' You Taillebois, what have you to propose in this arduous 
matter? Frontdebreuf has another view; thinks, in his 
southern counties, they will go with the Protectionist move- 
ment, and repeal the malt-tax, the African Squadron, and 
the window-duty itself. Potdevin, what is your opinion 
of the measure; will it hold in your parts? So, Fitzurse 
disagrees, then ! Tete-d'etoupes, speak out. And first, the 



vi.] PARLIAMENTS 217 

pleasure of a glass of wine, my infant ? " Thus, for a fort- 
night's space, they carried on, after a human manner, their 
grand National Consult or Parliamentum ; intermingling 
Dinner with it (as is still the modern method); debating 
everything, as Tacitus describes the Ancient Germans to have 
done, two times : once sober, and once what he calls * drunk,' 
not dead-drunk, but jolly round their big table ; that so 
both sides of the matter might be seen ; and, midway between 
rash hope and unreasonable apprehension, the true decision 
of it might be hit. To this hour no public matter, with 
whatever serious argument, can be settled in England till 
it have been dined upon, perhaps repeatedly dined upon. 

To King Rufus there could no more natural method pre- 
sent itself, of getting his affairs of sovereignty transacted, 
than this same. To assemble all his working Sub-kings 
about him ; and gather in a human manner, by the aid of 
sad speech and of cheerful, what their real notions, opinions, 
and determinations were. No way of making a law, or of 
getting one executed when made, except by even such a 
General Consult in one form or another. Naturally too, 
as in all places where men meet, there established themselves 
modes of proceeding in this Christmas Parliamentum : secre- 
taries from the first were needed there, strict record of the 
results arrived-at being indispensable : and the methods of 
arriving, marginally noted or otherwise, would not be for- 
gotten : such methods, with trials of ever new methods, 
accumulating, and in the course of continual practice getting 
sifted, rejected, adopted, and committed to record, the vast 
elaboration, now called Law of Parliament, Privilege, Practice 
of Parliament, and that huge sheepskin quarry, in which 
Dryasdust bores and grovels as if the world's or England's 
secret lay there, grew to be what we see. 

So likewise in the time of the Edwards, when Parliament 
gradually split itself into Two Houses ; and Borough Members 
and Knights of the Shire were summoned up to answer, 
Whether they could stand such and such an impost ? and 



218 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

took upon them to answer, " Yes, your Majesty ; but we 
have such and such grievances greatly in need of redress 
first," nothing could be more natural and human than such 
a Parliament still was. And so, granting subsidies, stating 
grievances, and notably widening its field in that latter 
direction, accumulating new modes, and practices of Parlia- 
ment greatly important in world-history, the old Parliament 
continued an eminently human, veracious, and indispensable 
entity, achieving real work in the Centuries. Down, we may 
say, to the Century of Charles First, when being constrained 
by unforeseen necessity to do so, it took suddenly, like water 
at the boiling point, a quite immense development of 
function ; and performed that new function too, to the 
world's and its own amazement, in an eminently human, 
authentic and effectual manner, the * supply ' it granted his 
Majesty, this time (in front of Whitehall, as it ultimately 
proved), being of a very unexpected yet by no means 
unessential nature ; and the ' grievance ' it now stated for 
redress being the transcendent one of Compulsion towards 
Spiritual Nightmare, towards Canting Idolatry, and Death 
Eternal, which I do not wonder that they couldn't endure, 
and wouldn't ! Which transcendent grievance, it is well 
known, they did get redressed, in a most conspicuous manner, 
they, for the time being ; and so have since set all the 
world upon similar but far less hopeful attempts, by methods 
which appear the same, and are not the same but different. 

This Long Parliament which conquered its King, and even 
extinguished him, since he would in no way be quiet when 
conquered ; and which thus, the first of such Assemblages, 
declared that it was Sovereign in the Nation, and more royal 
than any King who could be there, has set a flaming pattern 
to all the world, which now after centuries all the world is 
fruitlessly bent to emulate. This ever- memorable Long 
Parliament is definable, both in regard to its destinies in 
History, and to its intrinsic collective and individual worth 
among Deliberative Assemblies, as the Acme of Parliaments ; 



VI.J PARLIAMENTS 219 

the highest that it lay in them to be, or to do, in human 
affairs. The consummation, this, and slow cactus-flowerage 
of the parliamentary tree among mankind, which blossoms 
only in thousands of years, and is seen only once by men : 
the Father, this, of all Congresses, National Conventions 
and sublunary Parliaments that have since been. 

But what I had to remark of this Long Parliament, and 
of its English predecessors generally from the times of Rufus 
downwards, is their perfect veracity of purpose, their exact 
adaptation to getting the business done that was in hand. 
Supplies did, in some way, need to be granted ; grievances, 
such as never fail, did in some way need to be stated and 
redressed. The silent Peoples had their Parliamentum ; and 
spake by it to their Kings who governed them. In all human 
Government, wherever a man will attempt to govern men, 
this is a function necessary as the breath of life : and it must 
be said the old European Populations and the fortunate 
English best of all, did this function well. The old Parlia- 
ments were authentic entities; came upon indispensable 
work ; and were in earnest to their very finger-ends about 
getting it done. No conclave of railway directors, met with 
closed doors upon the sacred cause of scrip and dividends, 
could be more intent upon the business necessary, or be more 
appropriate for it, than those old Parliaments were. 

In modern Parliaments, again, indeed ever down from the 
Long Parliament, I note a sad gradual falling-off in this 
matter of * veracity,' which, alas, means a falling-off in all 
real use, or possible advantage, there can be to mankind in 
such Institutions. The Parliament, if we examine well, has 
irrevocably lost certain of its old functions, which it still 
pretends to do ; and has got certain new functions, which 
it never can do, and yet pretends to be doing : a doubly fatal 
predicament for the Parliament. Its functions growing ever 
more confused in this twofold way, the position of the Parlia- 
ment has become a false, and has gradually been becoming 



220 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

an impossible one, in modern affairs. While on the other 
hand, the poor Parliament, little conscious of all that, and 
long dimly struggling to remedy all that, and exist amidst 
it; or in later years, still more fatally admitting all that, 
and quietly consenting to exist beside it without remedy, 
has had to distort and pervert its poor activity in all manner 
of ways; and at length has diffused itself into oceans of 
windy talk reported in Hansard; has grown, in short, a 
National Palaver ; and is, as I said lately, one of the strangest 
entities this sun ever looked down upon. For, I think, a 
National Palaver recognised as Sovereign, a solemn Convoca- 
tion of all the Stump-Orators in the Nation to come and 
govern us, was not seen in the earth till recently. I consider 
it has been reserved for these our Latter Generations; a 
product long ripening for us from afar; and would fain 
hope that, like the Long Parliament, or acme and consummate 
flower in any kind, it can only be a transient phenomenon ! 

Some functions that are and continue real the Parliament 
still has ; and these it becomes infinitely necessary to dis- 
sever, and extricate alive, from the ocean of unreality in 
which they swim. Unreality is death, to Parliaments and 
to all things. The real functions whatsoever they are, these, 
most certainly, are all the good we shall ever get of Par- 
liament; and the question now is, Shall said good be 
drowned, or not be drowned, in the immeasurable accom- 
paniment of imaginary functions which are evil and falsity, 
and that only ? 



In the way of changed times I note two grand modern 
facts, omitting many minor, which have, one of them irre- 
vocably, and the other hopelessly for the present, altered from 
top to bottom the function and position of all Parliaments ; 
and which do now fatally vitiate their procedure everywhere, 
rendering much of what they do a superfluity, a mere 
hypocrisy, or noxious grimace ; and thus infecting even what 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 221 

is real in their function with a windy falsity, lamentable to 
behold and greatly requiring to be altered : Fact first, the 
existence of an Unfettered Press, with its perennial ever- 
increasing torrent of morning newspapers, pamphlets, books : 
fact second, that there is now no King present in Parliament ; 
no King now there, the King having vanished, in front 
of Whitehall, long since ! Fact first I take to be unalter- 
able. Complete alteration of fact second I discern to be 
distant, but likewise to be indispensable and inevitable ; and 
to require urgently here and now (by New Downing Streets 
or otherwise) a strenuous beginning, from all good citizens 
who would do any reform in their generation. Both facts 
together have dislocated every joint of the old arrangement, 
and made the modern Parliament a new creature; and 
whosoever means to work reform there, will either open his 
eyes, and keep them open, to both these facts, or work only 
mischief and ruin. 

In countries that can stand a Free Press, which many 
cannot, but which England, thanks to her long good training, 
still can, it is evident the National Consult or real Parlia- 
mentary Debate goes on of itself, everywhere, continually. 
Is not the Times newspaper an open Forum, open as never 
Forum was before, where all mortals vent their opinion, state 
their grievance, all manner of grievances, from loss of your 
umbrella in a railway, to loss of your honour and fortune by 
unjust sovereign persons ? One grand branch of the Parlia- 
ment's trade is evidently dead forever ! And the beautiful 
Elective Parliament itself is nothing like so living as it used 
to be. If we will consider it, the essential truth of the 
matter is, every British man can now elect himself to Par- 
liament without consulting the hustings at all. If there 
be any vote, idea or notion in him, on any earthly or heavenly 
thing, cannot he take a pen, and therewith autocratically 
pour forth the same into the ears and hearts of all people, 
so far as it will go ? Precisely so far ; and, what is a great 



222 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

advantage too, no farther. The discussion of questions goes 
on, not in St. Stephen's now, but from Dan to Beersheba 
by able-editors and articulate -speaking creatures that can 
get others to listen to them. This is the fact ; and it demands 
to be attended to as such, and will produce changes, I 
think, by and by. 

What is the good of men collected, with effort, to debate 
on the benches of St. Stephen's, now when there is a Times 
Newspaper ? Not the discussion of questions ; only the ulti- 
mate voting of them (a very brief process, I should think !) 
requires to go on, or can veritably go on, in St. Stephen's 
now. The honourable gentleman is oftenest very wearisome 
in St. Stephen's now : his and his Constituency's Aye or No, 
is all we want of the honourable gentleman there ; all we are 
ever like to get of him there, could it but be had without 
admixtures ! If your Lordship will reflect on it, you will 
find it an obsolete function, this debating one of his ; useless 
in these new times, as a set of riding postboys would be, 
along the line of the Great Western Railway. Loving my 
life, and time which is the stuff of life, I read no Parlia- 
mentary Debates, rarely any Parliamentary Speech ; but I 
am told there is not, once in the seven years, the smallest 
gleam of new intelligence thrown on any matter, earthly or 
divine, by an honourable gentleman on his legs in Parliament. 
Nothing offered you but wearisome, dreary, thrice - boiled 
colewort ; a bad article at first, and served and again served 
in Newspapers and Periodical and other Literatures, till even 
the inferior animals would recoil from it. Honourable gentle- 
men have complained to myself that under the sky there was 
not such a bore. What is or can be the use of this, your 
Lordship ? 

Let an honourable gentleman who has colewort, or stump- 
oratory of that kind, send it direct to the Times ; perhaps 
they will print it for him, and then all persons can read 
it there who hope instruction from it. If the Times refuse 
to print it, let the honourable gentleman, if still so minded, 



vi.J PARLIAMENTS 223 

print it at his own expense ; let him advertise it at a penny 
the gross, distribute it gratis as handbill, or even offer a 
small reward per head to any citizen that will read it : but 
if, after all, no body of citizens will read it even for a reward, 
then let the honourable gentleman retire into himself, and 
consider what such omens mean ! So much I take to be fair, 
or at least unavoidable in a free country : Let every creature 
try to get his opinion listened to ; and let honourable gentle- 
men who can print their own stump-oratory, and offer the 
public a reward for using it, by all means do so. But that, 
when no human being will incline or even consent to have 
their said oratory, they can get upon their legs in Parliament 
and pour it out still, to the burdening of many Newspapers, 
to the boring of their fellow-creatures, and generally to the 
despair of all thinking citizens in the community : this is and 
remains, I must crave to say, an infatuation, and, whatever 
respectable old coat you put upon it, is fast growing a 
nuisance which must be abated. 

Still more important for a Parliament is the question : 
King present there, or no King ? Certain it always is, and 
if forgotten, it much requires to be brought to mind, that 
a Parliament acting in the character of a body to be con- 
sulted by the sovereign ruler, or executive King of a Nation, 
differs immensely from a Parliament which is itself to enact 
the sovereign ruler, and to be supreme over all things ; not 
merely giving its advice, its remonstrance, dissent or assent, 
and leaving the ruler still to decide with that new illumina- 
tion ; but deciding of itself, and by its Yes or its No 
peremptorily ordering all things to be or not to be. These, 
I say, are two extremely different characters for a Parliament 
to enact ; and they necessitate all manner of distinctions, of 
the most vital nature, in our idea of a Parliament ; so that 
what applies with full force to a Parliament acting the 
former character, will not apply at all to one enacting 
the latter : nay, what is of the highest benefit in the former 
kind of Parliament, may not only in the latter kind be 



224 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

of no benefit, but be even of the fatalest detriment, and 
bring destruction to the poor Parliament itself and to all 
that depends thereon. 

It is first of all, therefore, to be inquired, Whether your 
Parliament is actually in practice the Adviser of the Sovereign ; 
or is the Sovereign itself ? For the distinction is profound ; 
goes down to the very roots of Parliament and of the Body 
Politic : and if you confound the two kinds of Parliaments, 
and apply to the one the psalmodyings and celebratings of 
constitutional doctors (very rife through the eighteenth 
century), which were meant for the other, and were partly 
true of the other, but are altogether false of this, you will 
set forth in a radically wrong course, and will advance 
incessantly, with whatever psalmodyings of your own or of 
the world's, to a goal you are like to be much surprised at ! 
Under which of these two descriptions the British Par- 
liament of our time falls, no one can need to be informed. 
Apart from certain thin fictions,* and constitutional cobwebs 
which it is not expected any one should not see through, our 
Parliament is the sovereign ruler and real executive King of 
this Empire ; and constitutional men, who for a century past 
have been singing praises to that sublime Institution in its 
old character, are requested to look at it in this new one, 
and see what praises it has earned for itself there. Hitherto, 
in these last fifteen years since it has worked without shackle 
in that new character, one does not find its praises mount 
very high ! The exercise of English Sovereignty, if that mean 
governance of the Twenty-seven million British souls and 
guidance of their temporal and eternal interests towards a 
good issue, does not seem to stand on the very best footing 
just at present ! Not as a Sovereign Ruler of the Twenty- 
seven million British men, or heroic guide of their temporal 
or their eternal interests, has the reformed Parliament 
distinguished itself as yet, but otherwise only if at all. 

In fact, there rises universally the complaint, and ex- 
pression of surprise, That our reformed Parliament cannot 



vi.] PARLIAMENTS 

get on with any kind of work, except that of talking, which 
does not serve much ; and the Chief Minister has been heard 
lamenting, in a pathetic manner, that the Business of the 
Nation (meaning thereby the voting of the supplies) was 
dreadfully obstructed ; and that it would be difficult for him 
to accomplish the Business of the Nation (meaning thereby 
the voting of the supplies), if honourable gentlemen would not 
please to hold their tongues a little. It is really pathetic, 
after a sort ; and unless parliamentary eloquence will suffice 
the British Nation, and its businesses and wants, one sees not 
what is to become of us in that direction. For, in fine, the 
tragic experience is dimly but irrepressibly forcing itself on 
all the world, that our British Parliament does not shine as 
Sovereign Ruler of the British Nation ; that it was excellent 
only as Adviser of the Sovereign Ruler ; and has not, somehow 
or other, the art of getting work done ; but produces talk 
merely, not of the most instructive sort for most part, and in 
vortexes of talk is not unlike to submerge itself and the whole 
of us, if help come not ! 

My own private notion, which I invite all reformed British 
citizens to reflect on, is and has for a long time been, That 
this dim universal experience, which points towards very tragic 
facts, will more and more rapidly become a clear universal 
experience, and disclose a tragic law of Nature little dreamt 
of by constitutional men of these times. That a Parliament, 
especially a Parliament with Newspaper Reporters firmly 
established in it, is an entity which by its very nature cannot 
do work, but can do talk only, which at times may be 
needed, and at other times again may be very needless. 
Consider, in fact, a body of Six-hundred and fifty-eight mis- 
cellaneous persons set to consult about 'business' with 
Twenty-seven millions mostly fools assiduously listening to 
them, and checking and criticising them : was there ever 
since the world began, will there ever be till the world end, 
any 'business 1 accomplished in these circumstances? The 
beginning of all business everywhere, as all practical persons 



226 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

testify, is decidedly this, That every man shut his mouth, and 
do not open it again till his thinking and contriving faculty 
have elaborated something worth articulating. Which rule 
will much abridge the flow of speech in such assemblies ! 
This, however, is the preliminary fundamental rule for business ; 
and this, alas, is precisely the rule which cannot be attended 
to in constitutional Parliaments. 

Add now another most unfortunate condition, That your 
Parliamentary Assembly is not very much in earnest, not at 
all ' dreadfully in earnest,' to do even the best it can ; that in 
general the Nation it represents is no longer an earnest 
Nation, but a light, sceptical, epicurean one, which for a 
century has gone along smirking, grimacing, cutting jokes 
about all things, and has not been bent with dreadful 
earnestness on anything at all, except on making money each 
member of it for himself : here, certainly enough, is a Parlia- 
ment that will do no business except such as can be done in 
sport ; and unfortunately, it is well known, almost none can 
be done in that way. To which Parliament, in the centre of 
such a Nation, introduce now assiduous Newspaper Reporters, 
and six yards of small type laid on all breakfast-tables every 
morning ; alas, are not the Six-hundred and fifty-eight mis- 
cellaneous gentlemen, who sit to do sovereign business in such 
circumstances, verily a self-contradiction, a solecism in Nature; 
Nature having appointed that business shall not be done in 
that way ? Incapable they of doing business ; capable of 
speech only, and this none of the best. Speech which, as we 
can too well see, whether it be speech to the question and to 
the wise men near, or * speech to Runcombe ' (as the Americans 
call it), to the distant constituencies and the twenty-seven 
millions mostly fools, will yearly grow more worthless as 
speech, and threaten to finish by becoming burdensome to 
gods and men ! 

So that the sad conclusion, which all experience, wherever 
it has been tried, is fatally making good, appears to be, That 
Parliaments, admirable as Advising Bodies, and likely to be 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 227 

in future universally useful in that capacity, are, as Ruling 
and Sovereign Bodies, not useful, but useless or worse. That 
a Sovereign with nine-hundred or with six-hundred and fifty- 
eight heads, all set to talk against each other in the presence 
of thirty-four or twenty-seven or eighteen millions, cannot do 
the work of sovereignty at all ; but is smitten with eternal 
incompetence for that function by the law of Nature itself, 
Such, alas, is the sad conclusion; and in England, and wherever 
else it is tried, a sad experience will rapidly make it good. 

Only perhaps in the United States, which alone of countries 
can do without governing, every man being at least able to 
live, and move-off into the wilderness, let Congress jargon as it 
will, can such a form of so-called * Government' continue, 
for any length of time, to torment men with the semblance, 
when the indispensable substance is not there. For America, 
as the citizens well know, is an * unparalleled country,' with 
mud soil enough and fierce sun enough in the Mississippi 
Valley alone to grow Indian corn for all the extant Posterity 
of Adam at this time ; what other country ever stood in 
such a case ? * Speeches to Buncombe,' and a constitutional 
battle of the Kilkenny cats, which in other countries are 
becoming tragical and unendurable, may there still fall under 
the comical category. If indeed America should ever experi- 
ence a higher call, as is likely, and begin to feel diviner wants 
than that of Indian corn with abundant bacon and molasses, 
and unlimited scope for all citizens to hunt dollars, America 
too will find that caucuses, division-lists, stump-oratory and 
speeches to Buncombe will not carry men to the immortal gods; 
that the Washington Congress, and constitutional battle of 
Kilkenny cats is, there as here, naught for such objects; 
quite incompetent for such ; and, in fine, that said sublime 
constitutional arrangement will require to be (with terrible 
throes, and travail such as few expect yet) remodelled, abridged, 
extended, suppressed ; torn asunder, put together again ; 
not without heroic labour, and effort quite other than that of 
the Stump-Orator and the Revival Preacher, one day ! 



228 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Thus if the first grand branch of parliamentary business, 
that of stating grievances, has fallen to the Unfettered Presses, 
and become quite dead for Parliaments, infecting them with 
mere hypocrisy when they now try it, the second or new 
grand branch of business intrusted to them, and passionately 
expected and demanded of them, is one which they cannot 
do ; the attempt and pretence to do which can only still 
farther involve them in hypocrisy, in fatal cecity, stump- 
oratory, futility, and the faster accelerate their doom, and 
ours if we depend on them. 

We may take it as a fact, and should lay it to heart every- 
where, That no Sovereign Ruler with six-hundred and fifty- 
eight heads, set to rule twenty-seven millions, by continually 
talking in the hearing of them all, can for the life of it make 
a good figure in that vocation ; but must by nature make a 
bad figure, and ever a worse and worse, till, some good day, 
by soft recession or by rude propulsion, as the Omnipotent 
Beneficence may direct, it get relieved from said vocation. 

In the whole course of History I have heard of only 
two Parliaments of the sovereign sort, that did the work of 
sovereignty with some effect : the National Convention, in 
Paris, during the French Revolution ; and the Long Parlia- 
ment, here at London, during our own. Not that the work, 
in either case, was perfect ; far enough from that ; but with 
all imperfections it was got done ; and neither of these two 
workers proved to be quite futile, or a solecism in its place in 
the world. These two Parliaments succeeded, and did not 
fail. The conditions, however, were peculiar; not likely to 
be soon seen again. 

In the first place, of both these Parliaments it can be said 
that they were 'dreadfully in earnest'; in earnest as no 
Parliaments before or since ever were. Nay, indeed, in the 
end, it had become a matter of life or death with them. 
But apart from that latter consideration, in the Long Parlia- 
ment especially, nothing so astonishes a modern man as the 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 229 

serious, solemn, nay, devout, religiously earnest spirit in which 
almost every member had come up to his task. For the 
English was yet a serious devout Nation, as in fact it 
intrinsically still is, and ever tends and strives to be; this 
its poor modern levity, sceptical kiiowingness, and sniffing 
grinning humour, being forced on it, and sitting it very ill : 
ever a devout Nation, I say ; and the Divine Presence yet 
irradiated this poor Earth and its business to most men ; and 
to all Englishmen the Parliament, we can observe, was still 
what their Temple was to the ancient Hebrews ; the most 
august of terrestrial objects, into which when a man entered, 
he felt that he was standing on holy ground. Literally so ; 
and much is the modern man surprised at it ; and only after 
much reluctance can he admit it to be credible, to be certain 
and visible among our old fathers there. In which temper 
alone, is there not sure promise of work being done, under 
any circumstances whatsoever? Given any lamest Talking 
Parliament, with its Chartisms or its starving Irish, and a 
starving world getting all into pike-points round it; given 
the saddest natural solecism discoverable in the Earth or 
under the Earth ; inform it with this noble spirit, it will 
from the first hour become a less sad solecism ; it will, if such 
divine spirit hold in it, and nerve its continual efforts, cease 
at last to be a solecism, and by self-sacrifice or otherwise 
become a veracity, and get itself adopted by Nature. 

But secondly, what likewise is of immense significance, the 
Long Parliament had no Reporters. Very far from that ; no 
Member himself durst so much as whisper to any extraneous 
mortal, without leave given, what went on within those sacred 
walls. Solemn reprimand from the Speaker, austere lodgment 
in the Tower, if he did. If a patriot stranger, coming up on 
express pilgrimage from the country, chance to gaze in from 
the Lobby too curiously on the august Assemblage (as once 
or twice happens), he is instantly seized by the fit usher ; led, 
pale as his shirt, into the floor of the honourable House, 
Speaker Lenthall's and four hundred other pairs of Olympian 



230 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

eyes transfixing him, that it be there ascertained, Whether 
the Tower, the Tarpeian rock, or what in Nature or out of 
it, shall be the doom of such a man ! A silent place withal, 
though a talking one ; hermetically sealed ; no whisper to be 
published of it, except what the honourable House itself 
directs. Let a modern honourable member, with his reporters" 
gallery, his strangers' gallery, his female ventilator, and twenty- 
seven millions mostly fools listening to him at Buncombe, 
while all at hand are asleep, consider what a fact is that 
old one ! 

But thirdly, what also is a most important fact in this 
question, the Long Parliament, after not many months of 
private debating, split itself fairly into two parties ; and the 
Opposition party fairly rode away, designing to debate in 
another manner thenceforth. What an abatement of parlia- 
mentary eloquence in that one fact by itself, is evident 
enough ! The Long Parliament, for all manner of reasons, 
for these three and for others that could be given, was an 
unexampled Parliament properly indeed, as I sometimes 
define it, the Father of all Parliaments which have sat since 
in this world ! 

The French Convention did its work, too ; and this under 
circumstances intrinsically similar, much as they differed out- 
wardly. No Parliament more ' in earnest ' ever sat in any 
country or time ; and indeed it was the Parliament of a 
Nation all in deadly earnest ; gambling against the world for 
life or for death. The Convention had indeed Reporters ; and 
encountered much parliamentary eloquence at its starting, and 
underwent strange handlings and destinies in consequence ; 
but we know how it managed with its parliamentary eloquence, 
and got that reduced to limits, when once business did behove 
to be done ! The Convention, its Girondins and opposition 
parties once thrown out, had its Committee of Salut Publiqut, 
consisting of Twelve, of Nine, or even properly of Three ; in 
whose hands lay all sovereign business, and the whole terrible 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 231 

task of ascertaining what was to be done. Of which latter, 
the latter being itself so immense, so swift and imperatively 
needful, all parliamentary eloquence was to be the enforce- 
ment and publisher and recorder merely. And whatever 
eloquent heads chose to obstruct this sovereign Committee, 
the Convention had its guillotine, and swiftly rid itself of 
these and of their eloquence. Whereby business went on, 
without let on that side ; and actually got itself done ! 

These are the only instances I know, of Parliaments that 
succeeded in the business of Government ; and these I think 
are not inviting instances to the British reformer of this day. 
Rather what we may call paroxysms of parliamentary life, 
than instances of what could be continuously expected of 
any Parliament, or perhaps even transiently wished of any. 
They were the appropriate, and as it proved, the effectual 
organism for Periods of a quite transcendent character in 
National Life ; such as it is not either likely or desirable that 
we should see, except at very long intervals, in human affairs. 

The fact is, Parliaments have had two great blows, in 
modern times : and are now in a manner quite shorn of their 
real strength, and what is still worse, invested with an 
imaginary. Faust of Mentz, when he invented ' movable 
types,' inflicted a terrible blow on Parliaments ; suddenly, 
though yet afar off, reducing them to a mere scantling of 
their former self, and taking all the best business out of their 
hands. Then again John Bradshaw, when he ordered the 
hereditary King to vanish, in front of Whitehall, and pro- 
claimed that Parliament itself was King, John, little 
conscious of it, inflicted a still more terrible blow on Parlia- 
ments ; appointing them to do (especially with Fawt too, or 
the Morning Newspaper, gradually getting in) what Nature 
and Fact had decided they could never do. In which doubly 
fatal state, with Faust busier than ever among them, they 
continue at this moment, working towards strange issues, 
I do believe ! 



232 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Or, speaking in less figurative language, our conclusion is, 
first, That Parliaments, while they continued, as our English 
ones long did, mere Advisers of the Sovereign Ruler, were in- 
valuable institutions ; and did, especially in periods when 
there was no Tvmes Newspaper, or other general Forum free 
to every citizen who had three fingers and a smattering of 
grammar, deserve well of mankind, and achieve services for 
which we should be always grateful. This is conclusion first. 
But then, alas, equally irrefragable comes conclusion second, 
That Parliaments when they get to try, as our poor British 
one now does, the art of governing by themselves as the 
Supreme Body in the Nation, make no figure in that capacity, 
and can make none, but by the very nature of the case are 
unable to do it. Only two instances are on record of Parlia- 
ments having, in any circumstances, succeeded as Governing 
Bodies ; and it is even hoped, or ought to be, by men 
generally, that there may not for another thousand years be 
a third ! 

As not only our poor British Parliament of those years 
and decades, but all the sudden European Parliaments at 
Paris, Frankfort, Erfurt and elsewhere, are Parliaments which 
undertake that second or impossible function of governing as 
Parliaments, and must either do it, or sink in black anarchy 
one knows not whitherward, the horoscope of Parliaments is 
by no means cheering at present; and good citizens may 
justly shudder, if their anticipations point that way, at the 
prospect of a Chartist Parliament here. For your Chartist 
Parliament is properly the consummation of that fatal tend- 
ency, towards the above-mentioned impossible function, on the 
part of Parliaments. A tendency not yet consummated with 
us ; for we still have other fragments of old Authority lodged 
elsewhere than in the Parliament, which still struggles here 
and there to accomplish a little governing though under 
strange conditions : and to instal a Parliament of the Six 
Points would be precisely to extinguish with the utmost 
rapidity all such fragments, and solemnly by National Charter 



vi.] PARLIAMENTS 233 

and Six Points, to bid the Parliament, "Be supreme King 
over us, thou, in all respects ; and rule us, thou, since it is 
impossible for thee ! " 

These are serious considerations, sufficient to create alarm 
and astonishment in any constitutional man. But really it 
grows late in the day with constitutional men ; and it is time 
for them to look up from their Delolme. If the constitu- 
tional man will take the old Delolme-Bentham spectacles off 
his nose, and look abroad into the Fact itself with such eyes 
as he may have, I consider he will find that reform in matters 
social does not now mean, as he has long sleepily fancied, 
reform in Parliament alone or chiefly or perhaps at all. My 
alarming message to him is, that the thing we vitally need 
is not a more and more perfectly elected Parliament, but 
some reality of a Ruling Sovereign to preside over Parlia- 
ment; that we have already got the former entity in some 
measure, but that we are farther than ever from the road 
towards the latter ; and that if the latter be missed and not 
got, there is no life possible for us. A New Downing Street, 
an infinitely reformed Governing Apparatus ; there some 
hope might lie. A Parliament, any conceivable Parliament, 
continuing to attempt the function of Governor, can lead us 
only into No-Government which is called Anarchy; and the 
more * reformed ' or Democratic you make it, the swifter will 
such consummation be. 



Men's hopes from a Democratic or otherwise reformed 
Parliament are various, and rather vague at present; but 
surely this, as the ultimate essence, lies and has always lain 
in the heart of them all : That hereby we shall succeed better 
in doing the commandment of Heaven, instead of everywhere 
violating or ignoring Heaven's commandment, and incurring 
Heaven's curse, as now. To ascertain better and better what 



234 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

the will of the Eternal was and is with us, what the Laws of 
the Eternal are, all Parliaments, Ecumenic Councils, Con- 
gresses, and other Collective Wisdoms, have had this for their 
object. This or else nothing easily conceivable, except to 
merit damnation for themselves, and to get it too ! Never- 
theless, in the inexplicable universal votings and debatings of 
these Ages, an idea or rather a dumb presumption to the 
contrary has gone idly abroad; and at this day, over extensive 
tracts of the world, poor human beings are to be found, 
whose practical belief it is that if we ' vote ' this or that, so 
this or that will thenceforth be. "Who's to decide it?" they 
all ask, as if the whole or chief question lay there. " Who 's 
to decide it ? " asks the irritated British citizen, with a sneer 
in his tone. " Who "s to decide it ? " asks he, oftener than 
any other question of me. Decide it, O irritated British 
citizen ? Why, thou, and I, and each man into whose living 
soul the Almighty has breathed a gleam of understanding ; 
we are all, and each of us for his own self, to decide it : and 
woe will befall us, each and all, if we don't decide it aright ; 
according as the Almighty has already ' decided ' it, as it has 
been appointed to be and to continue, before all human 
decidings and after them all ! 

Practically men have come to imagine that the Laws of 
this Universe, like the laws of constitutional countries, are 
decided by voting ; that it is all a study of division-lists, and 
for the Universe too, depends a little on the activity of the 
whipper-in. It is an idle fancy. The Laws of this Universe, 
of which if the Laws of England are not an exact transcript, 
they should passionately study to become such, are fixed by 
the everlasting congruity of things, and are not fixable or 
changeable by voting! Neither properly, we say, are the 
Laws of England, or those of any other land never so 
republican or red-republican, fixable or changeable by that 
poor foolish process ; not at all, O constitutional Peter, much 
as it may astonish you ! Voting is a method we have agreed 
upon for settling temporary discrepancies of opinion as to 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 235 

what is law or not law, in this small section of the Universe 
called England : a good temporary method, possessing some 
advantages; which does settle the discrepancy for the moment. 
Nay, if the votings were sincere and loyal, we might have 
some chance withal of being right as to the question, and of 
settling it blessedly forever; though again, if the votings 
are insincere, selfish, almost professedly disloyal, and given 
under the influence of beer and balderdash, we have the 
proportionate sad chance of being wrong, and so settling it 
under curses, to be fearfully unsettled again ! 

For I must remark to you, and reiterate to you, that a 
continued series of votings transacted incessantly for sessions 
long, with three-times-three readings, and royal assents as 
many as you like, cannot make a law the thing which is no 
law. No, that lies beyond them. They can make it a 
sheepskin Act of Parliament ; and even hang men (though 
now with difficulty) for not obeying it : and this they reckon 
enough; the idle fools ! I tell you and them, it is a miserable 
blunder, this self-styled * law ' of theirs ; and I for one will 
study either to have no concern with it, or else by all 
judicious methods to disobey said blundering impious pre- 
tended * law. 1 In which sad course of conduct, very unpleasant 
to my feelings, but needful at such times, the gods and all 
good men, and virtually these idle fools themselves, will be on 
my side ; and so I shall succeed at length, in spite of obstacles; 
and the pretended * law ' will take down its gibbet-ropes, and 
abrogate itself, and march, with the town-drum beating in 
the rear of it, and beadles scourging the back of it, and 
ignominious idle clamour escorting it, to Chaos, one day ; and 
the Prince of Darkness, Father of Delusions, Devil, or what- 
ever his name be, who is and was always its true proprietor, 
will again hold possession of it, much good may it do 
him ! 

My friend, do you think had the united Posterity of Adam 
voted, and since the Creation done nothing but vote, that 
three and three were seven, would this have altered the 



236 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

laws of arithmetic ; or put to the blush the solitary Cocker 
who continued to assert privately that three and three were 
six ? I consider, not. And is arithmetic, think you, a thing 
more fixed by the Eternal, than the laws of justice are, and 
what the right is of man towards man ? The builder of this 
world was Wisdom and Divine Foresight, not Folly and 
Chaotic Accident. Eternal Law is silently present, every- 
where and everywhen. By Law the Planets gyrate in their 
orbits ; by some approach to Law the Street-Cabs ply in 
their thoroughfares. No pin's point can you mark within the 
wide circle of the All where God's Laws are not. Unknown 
to you, or known (you had better try to know them a 
little !) inflexible, righteous, eternal ; not to be questioned 
by the sons of men. Wretched being, do you hope to 
prosper by assembling six-hundred and fifty-eight poor 
creatures in a certain apartment, and getting them, after 
debate, and "Divide, 'vide, 'vide," and report in the 
Times, to vote what is not is ? You will carry it, you, by 
your voting and your eloquencing and babbling; and the 
adamantine basis of the Universe shall bend to your third 
reading, and paltry bit of engrossed sheepskin and dog-latin ? 
What will become of you ? 

Unless perhaps the Almighty Maker has forgotten this 
miserable anthill of a Westminster, of an England ; and has 
no Laws hi force here which are of moment to Him ? Not 
here and now ; only in Judea, and distant countries at remote 
periods of time ? Confess it, Peter, you have some cowardly 
notion to that effect, though ashamed to say so ! Miserable 
soul ! Don't you notice gravitation here, the law of birth 
and of death, and other laws ? Peter, do you know why the 
Age of Miracles is past? Because you are become an 
enchanted human ass (I grieve to say it) ; and merely bray 
parliamentary eloquence ; rejoice in chewed gorse, scrip 
coupons, or the like; and have no discernible 'Religion, 1 
except a degraded species of Phallus- Worship, whose liturgy 
is in the Circulating Libraries ! 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 237 

In Parliaments, Constitutional Conclaves and Collective 
Wisdoms, it is too fatally certain there have been many things 
approved of, which it was found on trial Nature did not 
approve but disapprove. Nature told the individual trying 
to lead his life by such rule, No ; the Nation of individuals, 
No. " Not this way, my children, though the wigs that pre- 
scribed it were of great size, and the bowowing they enforced 
it with was loud ; not by this way is victory and blessedness 
attainable ; by other ways than this. Only stagnation, 
degradation, choked sewers, want of potatoes, uncultivated 
heaths, overturned mud-cabins, and at length Chartism, street- 
barricades, Red Republic, and Chaos come again, will prove 
attainable by this ! " 

Here below there is but one thing needful ; one thing ; 
and that one will in nowise consent to be dispensed with ! 
He that can ascertain, in England or elsewhere, what the 
laws of the Eternal are and walk by them voted for or un- 
voted, with him it will be well ; with him that misses said 
laws, and only gets himself voted for, not well. Voting, in 
fact, O Peter, is a thing I value but little in any time, and 
almost at zero in this. Not a divine thing at all, my poor 
friend, but a human ; and in the beer-and-balderdash case, 
whatever constitutional doctors may say, almost a brutal. 
Voting, never a divine Apollo, was once a human Bottom 
the Weaver; and, so long as he continued in the sane and 
sincere state, was worth consulting about several things. 
But alas, enveloped now in mere stump-oratory, cecity, 
mutinous imbecility, and sin and misery, he is now an 
enchanted Weaver, wooed by the fatuous Queen of consti- 
tutional Faery, and feels his cheek hairy to the scratch. 
Beer rules him, and the Infinite of Balderdash ; and except 
as a horse might vote for tares or hard beans, he had better, 
till he grow wise again, hardly vote at all. I will thank thee 
to take him away, into his own place, which is very low down 
indeed ; and to put in the upper place something infinitely 
worthier. You ask what thing; in a triumphant manner, 



238 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

with erect ear and curved tail, O hapless quadruped ? How 
can I tell you what thing ? I myself know it, and every soul 
still human knows it, or may know ; but to the soul that has 
fallen asinine, and thinks the Laws of God are to be voted 
for, it is unknowable. 

* If of ten men nine are recognisable as fools, which is a 
common calculation,' says our Intermittent Friend, * how, in 
the name of wonder, will you ever get a ballot-box to grind 
you out a wisdom from the votes of these ten men ? Never 
by any conceivable ballot-box, nor by all the machinery in 
Bromwicham or out of it, will you attain such a result. Not 
by any method under Heaven, except by suppressing, and in 
some good way reducing to zero, nine of those votes, can 
wisdom ever issue from your ten. 

* Why men have got so universally into such a fond ex- 
pectation ? The reason might lead us far. The reason, alas, 
is, men have, to a degree never before exampled, forgotten 
that there is fixed eternal law in this Universe ; that except 
by coming upon the dictates of that, no success is possible 
for any nation or creature. That we should have forgotten 
this, alas, here is an abyss of vacuity in our much-admired 
opulence, which the more it is looked at saddens the thinking 
heart the more. 

* And yet,' continues he elsewhere, * it is unavoidable and 
indispensable at present. With voting and ballot- boxing 
who can quarrel, as the matter stands ? I pass it without 
quarrel ; nay, say respectfully, " Good speed to you, poor 
friends : Heaven send you not only a good voting-box, but 
something worth voting for ! Sad function yours, giving 
plumpers or split-votes for or against such a pair of human 
beings, and such a set of human causes. Adieu ! " ' 



And yet surely, not in England only, where the Institution 
is like a second nature to us, but in all countries where men 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 239 

have attained any civilisation, it is good that there be a 
Parliament. Morning Newspapers, and other temporary or 
permanent . changes of circumstances, may much change and 
almost infinitely abridge its function, but they never can 
abolish it. Under whatever reformed Downing Street, or 
indispensable new King, of these New Eras, England be 
governed, its Parliament too will continue indispensable. 
And it is much to be desired that all men saw clearly what 
the Parliament's real function, in these changed times of 
newspaper reporters and imaginary kings, had grown to be. 
We must set it to its real function ; and, at our peril and its, 
restrict it to that ! Its real function is the maximum of all 
we shall be able to get out of it. Wrap it in never so many 
sheepskins, and venerabilities of use-and-wont, you will not 
get it persuaded to do what its real function is not. End- 
less derangement, spreading into futility on every side, and 
ultimate ruin even to its real function, will result to you 
from setting it to work against what Nature and Fact have 
appointed for it. Your Dray-wagon, excellent for carting 
beer along the streets, start not with it from the chimney- 
tops, as Chariot of the Sun ; for it will not act in that 
capacity ! 

As a ' Collective Wisdom ' of Nations the talking Parlia- 
ment, I discern too well, can never more serve. Wisdom 
dwells not with stump-oratory ; to the stump-orator Wisdom 
has waved her sad and peremptory farewell. A Parliament, 
speaking through reporters to Buncombe and the Twenty- 
seven millions mostly fools, has properly given up that 
function ; that is not now the function it attempts. But 
even as the Condensed Folly of Nations ; Folly bound up 
into articulate masses, and able to say Yes and No for itself, 
it will much avail the Governing Man ! To know at what 
pitch the widespread Folly of the Nation now stands, what 
may safely be attempted with said Folly, and what not 
safely : this too is very indispensable for the Governing Man. 
Below this function, in the maddest times and with Faust of 



240 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Mentz reverberating every madness ad infinitum, no Parlia- 
ment can fall. 

Votes of men are worth collecting, if convenient. True, 
their opinions are generally of little wisdom, and can on 
occasion reach to all conceivable and inconceivable degrees of 
folly ; but their instincts, where these can be deciphered, are 
wise and human ; these, hidden under the noisy utterance of 
what they call their opinions, are the unspoken sense of man's 
heart, and well deserve attending to. Know well what the 
people inarticulately feel, for the Law of Heaven itself is 
dimly written there ; nay, do not neglect, if you have oppor- 
tunity, to ascertain what they vote and say. One thing the 
stupidest multitude at a hustings can do, provided only it be 
sincere : Inform you how it likes this man or that, this pro- 
posed law or that. " I do not like thee, Dr. Fell ; the 
reason why I cannot tell," and perhaps indeed there is no 
reason ; nevertheless let the Governor too be thankful to 
know the fact, ' full well ' ; for it may be useful to him. 
Nay, the multitude, even when its nonsense is not sincere, but 
produced in great part by beer and stump-oratory, will yet 
by the very act of voting feel itself bound in honour ; and so 
even in that case it apprises you, " Such a man, such a law, 
will I accept, being persuaded thereto by beer and stump- 
oratory, and having polled at hustings for the same." 

Beyond doubt it will be useful, will be indispensable, for 
the King or Governor to know what the mass of men think 
upon public questions legislative and administrative ; what 
they will assent to willingly, what unwillingly ; what they 
will resist with superficial discontents and remonstrances, what 
with obstinate determination, with riot, perhaps with armed 
rebellion. No Governor otherwise can go along with clear 
illumination on his path, however plain the loadstar and 
ulterior goal be to him ; but at every step he must be liable 
to fall into the ditch ; to awaken he knows not what nests of 
hornets, what sleeping dogkennels, better to be avoided. By 
all manner of means let the Governor inform himself of all 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 241 

this. To which end, Parliaments, Free Presses, and suchlike 
are excellent ; they keep the Governor fully aware of what 
the People, wisely or foolishly, think. Without in some way 
knowing it with moderate exactitude, he has not a possibility 
to govern at all. For example, the Chief Governor of Con- 
stantinople, having no Parliament to tell it him, knows it 
only by the frequency of incendiary fires in his capital, the 
frequency of bakers hanged at their shop -lintels ; a most 
inferior ex-postfacto method ! Profitable indisputably, essential 
in all cases where practicable, to know clearly what and where 
the obstacles are. Marching with noble aim, with the 
heavenly loadstars ever in your eye, you will thus choose your 
path with the prudence which is also noble, and reach your 
aim surely, if more slowly. 

With the real or seeming slowness we do not quarrel. 
The winding route, on uneven surfaces, may often be the 
swiftest; that is a point for your own prudences, practical 
sagacities, and qualities as a King : the indispensable point, 
for both you and us, is that you do always advance, unresting 
if unhasting, and know in every fibre of you that arrive you 
must. Rigidly straight routes find some admiration with the 
vulgar, and are rather apt to please at hustings ; but we know 
well enough they are no clear sign of strength of purpose. 
The Leming-rat, I have been told, travelling in myriads sea- 
ward from the hills of Norway, turns not to the right or 
the left : if these rats meet a haystack, they eat their way 
through it ; if a stone house, they try the same feat, and 
not being equal to eating the house, climb the walls of it, 
pour over the roof of it, and push forward on the old line, 
swimming or ferrying rivers, scaling or rounding precipices ; 
most consistent Lem ing-rats. And what is strange, too, 
their errand seaward is properly none. They all perish, 
before reaching the sea, or of hunger on the sand-beach ; 
their consistent rigidly straight journey was a journey no- 
whither ! I do not ask your Lordship to imitate the 
Leming-rat. 

ft 



242 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

But as to universal suffrage, again, can it be proved that, 
since the beginning of the world, there was ever given a 
universal vote in favour of the worthiest man or thing ? I 
have always understood that true worth, in any department, 
was difficult to recognise ; that the worthiest, if he appealed 
to universal suffrage, would have but a poor chance. John 
Milton, inquiring of universal England what the worth of 
Paradise Lost was, received for answer, Five Pounds Sterling. 
George Hudson, inquiring in like manner what his services on 
the railways might be worth, received for answer (prompt 
temporary answer), Fifteen Hundred Thousand ditto. Alas, 
Jesus Christ asking the Jews what he deserved, was not the 
answer, Death on the gallows ! Will your Lordship believe 
me, I feel it almost a shame to insist on such truisms. Surely 
the doctrine of judgment by vote of hustings has sunk now, 
or should be fast sinking, to the condition of obsolete with 
all but the commonest of human intelligences. With me, 
I must own, it has never had any existence. The mass 
of men consulted at hustings, upon any high matter what- 
soever, is as ugly an exhibition of human stupidity as this 
world sees. 

Universal suffrage assembled at hustings, I will consult 
it about the quality of New-Orleans pork, or the coarser kinds 
of Irish butter; but as to the character of men, I will if 
possible ask it no question : or if the question be asked and 
the answer given, I will generally consider, in cases of any 
importance, that the said answer is likely to be wrong, that 
I have to listen to the said answer and receive it as authentic, 
and for my own share to go, and with whatever strength may 
lie in me, do the reverse of the same. Even so, your Lord- 
ship ; for how should I follow a multitude to do evil ? There 
are such things as multitudes all full of beer and nonsense, 
even of insincere factitious nonsense, who by hypothesis 
cannot but be wrong. Or what safety will there be in a 
thousand or ten thousand brawling potwallopers, or block- 
heads of any rank whatever, if the Fact, namely the whole 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 243 

Universe and the Eternal Destinies, be against me ? These 
latter I for my share will try to follow, even if alone in doing 
so. It will be better for me. 

Your Lordship, there are fools, cowards, knaves, and 
gluttonous traitors true only to their own appetite, in 
immense majority, in every rank of life ; and there is nothing 
frightfuler than to see these voting and deciding ! " Not 
your way, my unhappy brothers, shall it be decided ; no, not 
while I, and * a company of poor men ' you may have heard 
of, live in this world. Vote it as you please," my friend Oliver 
was wont to say or intimate ; " vote it so, if you like ; there 
is a company of poor men that will spend all their blood 
before they see it settled so ! " Who, in such sad moments, 
but has to hate the profane vulgar, and feel that he must and 
will debar it from him ! And alas, the vulgarest vulgar, I 
often find, are not those in ragged coats at this day ; but 
those in fine, superfine, and superfinest ; the more is the 
pity ! Superfine coat symbolically indicates, like official 
stamp and signature, Bank-of-England Thousand-Pound Note\ 
and blinkard owls, in city and country, accept it cheerfully as 
such : but look closer, you may find it mere Bank of Elegance \ 
a flash-note travelling towards the eternal Fire ; and will 
have nothing to do with it, you, I hope ! 

Clearly enough, the King in constitutional countries would 
wish to ascertain all men's votes, their opinions, volitions on 
all manner of matters ; that so his whole scene of operations, 
to the last cranny of it, might be illuminated for him, and he, 
wherever he were working, might work with perfect know- 
ledge of the circumstances and materials. But the King, 
New Downing Street, or whatever the Sovereign's name is, 
will be a very poor King indeed if he admit all these votes 
into his system of procedure, and transform them into acts ; 
indeed I think, in that case, he will not be long for this 
world as a King ! No : though immense acclamation attend 
him at the first outset in that course, every volition and opinion 



244- LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

finding itself admitted into the poor King's procedure, 
yet unless the volitions and opinions are wise and not foolish, 
not the smallest ultimate prosperity can attend him ; and all 
the acclamations of the world will not save him from the 
ignominious lot which Nature herself has appointed for all 
creatures that do not follow the Law which Nature has laid 
down. 

You ask this and the other man what is his opinion, his 
notion, about varieties of things : and having ascertained 
what his notion is, and carried it off as a piece of information, 
surely you are bound, many times, most times if you are 
a wise man, to go directly in the teeth of it, and for his sake 
and for yours to do directly the contrary of it. Any man's 
opinion one would accept ; all men's opinion, could it be 
had absolutely without trouble, might be worth accepting. 
Nay, on certain points I even ask my horse's opinion : as to 
whether beans will suit him at this juncture, or a truss of 
tares ; on this and the like points I carefully consult my 
horse ; gather, by such language as he has, what my horse's 
candid opinion as to beans or the truss of tares is, and 
unhesitatingly follow the same. As what prudent rider 
would not ? There is no foolishest man but knows one and 
the other thing more clearly than any the wisest man does ; 
no glimmer of human or equine intelligence but can disclose 
something which even the intelligence of a Newton, not 
present in that exact juncture of circumstances, would not 
otherwise have ascertained. To such length you would 
gladly consult all equine, and much more all human intelli- 
gences : to such length ; and, strictly speaking, not any 
farther. 

Of what use towards the general result of finding out what 
it is wise to do, which is the one thing needful to all men 
and nations, can the fool's vote be ? It is either coincident 
with the wise man's vote, throwing no new light on the 
matter, and therefore superfluous ; or else it is contradictory, 
and therefore still more superfluous, throwing mere darkness 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 245 

on the matter, and imperatively demanding to be annihilated, 
and returned to the giver with protest. Woe to you if you 
leave that valid ! There are expressions of volition too, as 
well as of opinion, which you collect from foolish men, and 
even from inferior creatures : these can do you no harm, 
these it may be very beneficial for you to have and know ; 
but these also, surely it is often imperative on you to contra- 
dict, and would be ruinous and baleful for you to follow. 
You have to apprise the unwise man, even as you do the 
un wiser horse : " On the truss of tares I took your vote, and 
have cheerfully fulfilled it ; but in regard to choice of roads 
and the like, I regret to say you have no competency what- 
ever. No, my unwise friend, we are for Hammersmith and 
the West, not for Highgate and the Northern parts, on this 
occasion : not by that left turn, by this turn to the right 
runs our road ; thither, for reasons too intricate to explain 
at this moment, it will behove thee and me to go : Along, 
therefore ! " 

" But how ? " your Lordship asks, and all the world with 
you : " Are not two men stronger than one ; must not two 
votes carry it over one ? " I answer ; No, nor two thousand 
nor two million. Many men vote ; but in the end, you will 
infallibly find, none counts except the few who were in the 
right. Unit of that class, against as many zeros as you like ! 
If the King's thought w according to the will of God, or to 
the law appointed for this Universe, I can assure your Lord- 
ship the King will ultimately carry that, were he but one in 
it against the whole world. 

It is not by rude force, either of muscle or of will, that one 
man can govern twenty men, much more twenty millions of 
men. For the moment, if all the twenty are stark against 
his resolution never so wise, the twenty for the moment must 
have their foolish way ; the wise resolution, for the moment, 
cannot be carried. Let their votes be taken, or known (as 
is often possible) without taking ; and once well taken, let 
them be weighed, which latter operation, also an essential 



246 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

one for the King or Governor, is very difficult. If the weight 
be in favour of the Governor, let him in general proceed ; 
cheerfully accepting adverse account of heads, and dealing 
wisely with that according to his means ; often enough, in 
pressing cases, flatly disregarding that, and walking through 
the heart of it ; for in general it is but frothy folly and loud- 
blustering rant and wind. 

I have known minorities, and even small ones by the 
account of heads, do grand national feats long memorable 
to all the world, in these circumstances. Witness Cromwell 
and his Puritans ; a minority at all times, by account of 
heads ; yet the authors or saviours, as it ultimately proved, 
of whatsoever is divinest in the things we can still reckon ours 
in England. Minority by tale of heads ; but weighed in 
Heaven's balances, a most clear majority: this * company of 
poor men that will spend their blood rather,' on occasion 
shown, it has now become a noble army of heroes, whose 
conquests were appointed to endure forever. Indeed it is on 
such terms that grand national and other feats, by the sons 
of Adam, are generally done. Not without risk and labour 
to the doers of them ; no surely, for it never was an easy 
matter to do the real will of a Nation, much more the real 
will of this Universe in respect to a Nation. No, that is 
difficult and heroic ; easy as it is to count the voting heads 
of a Nation at any time, and do the behests of their beer and 
balderdash ; empty behests, very different from even their 
' will, 1 poor blockheads, to say nothing of the Nation's will 
and the Universe's will ! Which two, especially which latter, 
are alone worth doing. 

But if not only the number but the weight of votes pre- 
ponderate against your Governor, he, never so much in the 
right, will find it wise to hold his hand ; to delay, for a time, 
this his beneficent execution, which is ultimately inevitable 
and indispensable, of Heaven's Decrees ; the Nation being 
still unprepared. He will leave the bedarkened Nation yet 
a while alone. What can he do for it, if not even a small 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 247 

minority will stand by him ? Let him strive to enlighten 
the Nation ; let him pray, and in all ways endeavour, that 
the Nation be enlightened, that a small minority may open 
their eyes and hearts to the message of Heaven, which he, 
heavy-laden man and governor, has been commissioned to see 
done in this transitory earth, at his peril ! Heaven's message, 
sure enough, if it be true ; and Hell's if it be not, though 
voted for by innumerable two-legged animals without feathers 
or with ! 

On the whole, honour to small minorities, when they are 
genuine ones. Severe is their battle sometimes, but it is 
victorious always like that of gods. Tancred of Hauteville's 
sons, some eight centuries ago, conquered all Italy ; bound it 
up into organic masses, of vital order after a sort ; founded 
thrones and principalities upon the same, which have not yet 
entirely vanished, which, the last dying wrecks of which, 
still wait for some worthier successor, it would appear. The 
Tancred Normans were some Four Thousand strong ; the 
Italy they conquered in open fight, and bound up into masses 
at their ordering will, might count Eight Millions, all as 
large of bone, as eupeptic and black- whiskered as they. How 
came the small minority of Normans to prevail in this so 
hopeless-looking debate ? Intrinsically, doubt it not, because 
they were in the right ; because, in a dim, instinctive, but 
most genuine manner, they were doing the commandment of 
Heaven, and so Hearen had decided that they were to prevail. 
But extrinsically also, I can see, it was because the Normans 
were not afraid to have their skin scratched; and were 
prepared to die in their quarrel where needful. One man of 
that humour among a thousand of the other, consider it ! 
Let the small minority, backed by the whole Universe, and 
looked on by such a cloud of invisible witnesses, fall into no 
despair. 



What is to become of Parliament in the New Era, is less 



248 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

a question with me than what is to become of Downing 
Street. With a reformed Downing Street strenuously bent 
on real and not imaginary management of our affairs, I could 
foresee all manner of reform to England and its Parliament ; 
and at length in the gradual course of years, that highest 
acme of reform to Parliament and to England, a New 
Governing Authority, a real and not imaginary King set to 
preside there. With that, to my view, comes all blessedness 
whatsoever ; without that comes, and can come, nothing but, 
with ever-accelerated pace, ANAKCHY ; or the declaration of 
the fact that we have no Governor, and have long had none. 

For the rest, Anarchy advances as with seven-league boots, 
in these years. Either some New Downing Street and 
Incipiency of a real Hero-Kingship again, or else Chartist 
Parliament, with Apotheosis of Attorneyism, and Anarchy 
very undeniable to all the world : one or else the other, it 
seems to me, we shall soon have. Under a real Kingship 
the Parliament, we may rest satisfied, would gradually, with 
whatever difficulty, get itself inducted to its real function, 
and restricted to that, and moulded to the form fittest for 
that. If there can be no reform of Downing Street, I care 
not much for the reform of Parliament. Our doom, I per- 
ceive, is the Apotheosis of Attorneyism ; into that blackest of 
terrestrial curses we must plunge, and take our fate there like 
the others. 

For the sake both of the New Downing Street and of 
whatever its New Parliament may be, let us add here, what 
will vitally concern both these Institutions, a few facts, 
much forgotten at present, on the general question of En- 
franchisement ; and therewith end. Who is slave, and 
eternally appointed to be governed ; who free, and eternally 
appointed to govern ? It would much avail us all to settle 
this question. 

Slave or free is settled in Heaven for a man ; acts of par- 
liament attempting to settle it on earth for him, sometimes 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 249 

make sad work of it. Now and then they correctly copy 
Heaven's settlement in regard to it ; proclaim audibly what 
is the silent fact, " Here is a free man, let him be honoured ! " 
and so are of the nature of a God's Gospel to other men 
concerned. Far oftenest they quite miscopy Heaven's settle- 
ment, and copy merely the account of the Ledger, or some 
quite other settlement in regard to it ; proclaiming with 
an air of discovery, " Here is a Ten-pounder ; here is a 
Thousand-pounder ; Heavens, here is a Three-million pounder, 
is not he free ? " Nay, they are wont, here in England for 
some time back, to proclaim in the gross, as if it had become 
credible lately, all two-legged animals without feathers to be 
* free. 1 " Here is a distressed Nigger, 1 ' they proclaim, " who 
much prefers idleness to work, should not he be free to 
choose which ? Is not he a man and brother ? Clearly here 
are two legs and no feathers : let us vote him Twenty 
millions for enfranchisement, and so secure the blessing of 
the gods ! " 

My friends, I grieve to remind you, but it is eternally the 
fact : Whom Heaven has made a slave, no parliament of men 
nor power that exists on Earth can render free. No ; he is 
chained by fetters which parliaments with their millions 
cannot reach. You can label him free ; yes, and it is but 
labelling him a solecism, bidding him be the parent of 
solecisms wheresoever he goes. You can give him pumpkins, 
houses of tenpound rent, houses of ten-thousand pound : the 
bigger candle you light within the slave-image of him, it will 
but show his slave-features on the larger and more hideous 
scale. Heroism, manful wisdom is not his : many things you 
can give him, but that thing never. Him the Supreme 
Powers marked in the making of him, slave ; appointed him, 
at his and our peril, not to command but to obey, in this 
world. Him you cannot enfranchise, not him ; to proclaim 
this man free is not a God's Gospel to other men ; it is an 
alarming Devil's Gospel to himself and to us all. Devil's 
Gospel little feared in these days ; but brewing for the whole 



250 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

of us its big oceans of destruction all the same. States are 
to be called happy and noble in so far as they settle rightly 
who is slave and who free ; unhappy, ignoble, and doomed to 
destruction, as they settle it wrong. 

We may depend on it, Heaven in the most constitutional 
countries knows well who is slave, who is not. And with 
regard to voting, I lay it down as a rule, No real slave's vote 
is other than a nuisance, whensoever or wheresoever or in 
what manner soever it be given. That is a truth, No slave's 
vote ; and, alas, here is another not quite so plain, though 
equally certain, That as Nature and severe Destiny, not mere 
act of Parliament and possession of money-capital, determine 
a man's slavehood, so, by these latter, it has been, in in- 
numerable instances, determined wrong just at present ! In- 
stances evident to everybody, and instances suspected by 
nobody but the more discerning : the fact is, slaves are in a 
tremendous majority everywhere ; and the voting of them 
(not to be got rid of just yet) is a nuisance in proportion. 
Nuisance of proportionally tremendous magnitude, properly 
indeed the grand fountain of all other nuisances whatsoever. 

For it is evident, could you entirely exclude the slave's vote, 
and admit only the heroic free man's vote, folly, knavery, 
falsity, gluttonous imbecility, lowmindedness and cowardice 
had, if not disappeared from the earth, reduced themselves to 
a rigorous minimum in human affairs ; the ultimate New Era, 
and best possible condition of human affairs, had actually 
come. This is what I always pray for ; rejoicing in every- 
thing that furthers it, sorrowing for everything that furthers 
the reverse of it. And though I know it is yet a great way 
off, I know also either that it is inevitably coming, or that 
human society, and the possibility of man's living on this 
earth, has ended. And so for England too, nay, I think for 
England most and soonest of all, it will be behooveful that 
we attain some rectification, innumerable rectifications, in 
regard to this essential matter; and contrive to bid our 
Heaven's free men vote, and our Heaven's slaves be silent, 



VI.J PARLIAMENTS 251 

with infinitely more correctness than at present. Either on 
the hither brink of that black sea of Anarchy, wherein other 
Nations at present lie drowning and plunging, or after welter- 
ing through the same, if we can welter, it will have to be 
attained. In some measure, in some manner, attained : life 
depends on that, death on the missing of that. 

New definitions of slavery are pressingly wanted just now. 
The definition of a free man is difficult to find, so that all 
men could distinguish slave from free ; found, it would be 
invaluable ! The free man once universally recognised, we 
should know him who had the privilege to vote and assist in 
commanding, at least to go himself uncommanded. Men do 
not know his definition well at present ; never knew it worse ; 
hence these innumerable sorrows. 

The free man is he who is loyal to the Laws of this 
Universe ; who in his heart sees and knows, across all con- 
tradictions, that injustice cannot befall him here ; that 
except by sloth and cowardly falsity evil is not possible here. 
The first symptom of such a man is not that he resists and 
rebels, but that he obeys. As poor Henry Marten wrote in 
Chepstow Castle long ago, 

" Reader, if thou an oft-told tale wilt trust, 
Thou'lt gladly do and suffer what thou must." 

Gladly ; he that will go gladly to his labour and his suffering, 
it is to him alone that the Upper Powers are favourable and 
the Field of Time will yield fruit. c An oft-told tale,' friend 
Harry ; all the noble of this world have known it, and in 
various dialects have striven to let us know it ! The essence 
of all * religion 1 that was and that will be, is to make men 
free. Who is he that, in this Life-pilgrimage, will consecrate 
himself at all hazards to obey God and God's servants, and 
to disobey the Devil and his ? With pious valour this free 
man walks through the roaring tumults, invincibly the way 
whither he is bound. To him in the waste Saharas, through 



252 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

the grim solitudes peopled by galvanised corpses and doleful 
creatures, there is a loadstar ; and his path, whatever those 
of others be, is towards the Eternal. A man well worth 
consulting, and taking the vote of, about matters temporal ; 
and properly the only kind of man. Though always an 
exceptional, this was once a well-known man. He has become 
one of the rarest now ; but is not yet entirely extinct ; and 
will become more plentiful, if the Gods intend to keep this 
Planet habitable long. 

Him it were vain to try to find always without mistake ; 
alas, if he were in the majority, this world would be all * a 
school of virtue,' which it is far from being. Nevertheless to 
him, and in all times to him alone, belongs the rule of this 
world : that he be got to rule, that he be forbidden to rule 
and not got, means salvation or destruction to the world. 
Friend Peter, I am perfectly deliberate in calling this the 
truest doctrine of the constitution you have ever heard. And 
I recommend you to learn it gradually, and to lay it well to 
heart; for without it there is no salvation, and all other 
doctrines of the constitution are leather and prunella. Will 
any mass of Chancery parchments, think you, of respectablest 
traditions and Delolme philosophies, save a man or People that 
forgets this, from the eternal fire ? There does burn such a 
fire everywhere under this green earth-rind of ours, and 
London pavements themselves (as Paris pavements have done) 
can start up into sea-ridges, with a horrible * trough of the 
sea, 1 if the fire-flood urge ! 

To this man, I say, belongs eternally the government of the 
world. Where he reigns, all is blessed ; and the gods rejoice, 
and only the wicked make wail. Where the contrary of him 
reigns, all is accursed ; and the gods lament, and will, by 
terrible methods, rectify the matter by and by ! Have you 
forbidden this man to rule? Obey he cannot where the 
Devil and his servants rule ; how can he ? He must die 
thrice ruined, damned by the gods, if he do. He will retire 
rather, into deserts and rocky inaccessibilities, companion to 



VI.] PARLIAMENTS 253 

wild-beasts, to the dumb granites and the eternal stars, far 
from you and your affairs. You and your affairs, once well 
quit of him, go by a swift and ever swifter road ! 

I would recommend your Lordship to attack straightway, 
by the Industrial Regiments or better otherwise, that huge 
Irish and British Pauper Question, which is evidently the 
father of questions for us, the lowest level in our * universal 
stygian quagmire ' ; and to try whether (without ballot-box) 
there are no ' kings ' discoverable in England who would rally 
round you, in practical attempt towards draining said quag- 
mire from that point. And to be swift about it; for the 
time presses, and if your Lordship is not ready, I think the 
ballot-boxes and the six points are fast getting ready! 



NO. vn 

HUDSON'S STATUE 

[Isr JULY 1850] 

AT St. Ives in Huntingdonshire, where Oliver Cromwell 
farmed and resided for some years, the people have deter- 
mined to attempt some kind of memorial to that memorable 
character. Other persons in other quarters seem to be, more 
or less languidly, taking up the question ; in Country Papers 
I have read emphatic leading - articles, recommending and 
urging that there should be a * People's Statue ' of this great 
Oliver, Statue furnished by universal contribution from the 
English People; and set up, if possible, in London, in 
Huntingdon, or failing both these places, in St. Ives, or 
Naseby Field. Indeed a considerable notion seems to exist 
in the English mind, that some brass or stone acknowledg- 
ment is due to Cromwell, and ought to be paid him. So 
that the vexed question, * Shall Cromwell have a Statue ? ' 
appears to be resuscitating itself; and the weary Public must 
prepare to agitate it again. 

Poor English Public, they really are exceedingly bewildered 
with Statues at present. They would fain do honour to 
somebody, if they did but know whom or how. Unfortunately 
they know neither whom nor how ; they are, at present, the 
farthest in the world from knowing ! They have raised a set 
of the ugliest Statues, and to the most extraordinary persons, 
ever seen under the sun before. Being myself questioned, in 
reference to the New Houses of Parliament some years ago, 
" Shall Cromwell have a Statue ? " I had to answer, with 
sorrowful dubiety : " Cromwell ? Side by side with a sacred 
Charles the Second, sacred George the Fourth, and the other 

854 



NO. VII.] HUDSON'S STATUE 255 

sacred Charleses, Jameses, Georges, and Defenders of the 
Faith, I ani afraid he wouldn't like it ! Let us decide 
provisionally, No." And now again as to St. Ives and the 
People's Statue, is it not to be asked in like manner : " Who 
are the 'People'? Are they a People worthy to build 
Statues to Cromwell ; or worthy only of doing it to 

Hudson ? " This latter is a consideration that will lead 

us into far deeper and more momentous than sculptural 
inquiries ; and I will request the reader's excellent company 
into these for a little. 

The truth is, dear Reader, nowhere, to an impartial 
observant person, does the deep-sunk condition of the English 
mind, in these sad epochs ; and how, in all spiritual or moral 
provinces, it has long quitted company with fact, and ceased 
to have veracity of heart, and clearness or sincerity of pur- 
pose, in regard to such matters, more signally manifest 
itself, than in this affair of Public Statues. Whom doth the 
king delight to honour? that is the question of questions 
concerning the king's own honour. Show me the man you 
honour ; I know by that symptom, better than by any other, 
what kind of man you yourself are. For you show me there 
what your ideal of manhood is ; what kind of man you long 
inexpressibly to be, and would thank the gods, with your 
whole soul, for being if you could. 

In this point of view, it was always matter of regret with 
me that Hudson's Statue, among the other wonders of the 
present age, was not completed. The 25,0007. subscribed, 
or offered as oblation, by the Hero-worshippers of England 
to their Ideal of a Man, awoke many questions as to what 
outward figure it could most profitably take, under the 
eternal canopy ; questions never finally settled ; nor ever now 
to be settled, now when the universal Hudson ragnarok, or 
* twilight of the gods,' has arrived, and it is too clear no 
statue or cast-metal image of that Incarnation of the English 
Vishnu will ever be molten now ! Why was it not set up ; 
that the whole world might see it; that our 'Religion' 



256 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

might be seen, mounted on some figure of a Locomotive, 
garnished with Scrip-rolls proper; and raised aloft in some 
conspicuous place, for example, on the other arch at 
Hyde-Park Corner? By all opportunities, especially to all 
subscribers and pious sacrificers to the Hudson Testimonial, 
I have earnestly urged : Complete your Sin-Offering ; buy, 
with the Five -and -twenty Thousand Pounds, what utmost 
amount of brazen metal and reasonable sculptural supervision 
it will cover, say ten tons of brass, with a tolerable sculptor : 
model that, with what exactness Art can, into the enduring 
Brass Portrait and Express Image of King Hudson, as he 
receives the grandees of this country at his levees or soirees 
and couchees ; mount him on the highest place you can 
discover in the most crowded thoroughfare, on what you can 
consider the pinnacle of the English world : I assure you 
he will have beneficial effects there. To all men who are 
struggling for your approbation, and fretting their poor souls 
to fiddlestrings because you will not sufficiently give it, I will 
say, leading them to the foot of the Hudson mount of vision : 
" See, my worthy Mr. Rigmarole ; consider this surprising 
Copper Pyramid, in partly human form : did the celestial 
value of men's approbation ever strike you so forcibly before ? 
The new Apollo Belvidere this, or Ideal of the Scrip Ages. 
What do you think of it ? Allah Ilallah ; there is still one 
God, you see, in England ; and this is his Prophet. Let it 
be a source of healing to you, my unhappy Mr. Rigmarole ; 
draw from it * uses of terror,' as the old divines said ; uses of 
amazement, of new wisdom, of unutterable reflection upon the 
present epoch of the world ! " 

For, in fact, there was more of real worship in the affair of 
Hudson than is usual in such. The practical English mind 
has its own notions as to the Supreme Excellence ; knows the 
real from the spurious Avatar of Vishnu ; and does not 
worship without its reasons. The practical English mind, 
contemplating its divine Hudson, says with what remainder 
of reverence is in it : " Yes, you are something like the Ideal 



vn.J HUDSON'S STATUE 257 

of a Man ; you are he I would give my right arm and leg, 
and accept a potbelly, with gout, and an appetite for strong- 
waters, to be like ! You out of nothing can make a world, 
or huge fortune of gold. A divine intellect is in you, which 
Earth and Heaven, and Capel Court itself acknowledge ; at 
the word of which are done miracles. You find a dying 
railway ; you say to it, Live, blossom anew with scrip ; and 
it lives, and blossoms into umbrageous flowery scrip, to enrich 
with golden apples, surpassing those of the Hesperides, the 
hungry souls of men. Diviner miracle what god ever did ? 
Hudson, though I mumble about my thirty-nine articles, 
and the service of other divinities, Hudson is my god, and 
to him I will sacrifice this twenty-pound note : if perhaps he 
will be propitious to me ? " 

Object not that there was a mixed motive in this worship 
of Hudson ; that perhaps it was not worship at all. Un- 
doubtedly there were two motives mixed, but both of them 
sincere, as often happens in worship. 'Transcendent ad- 
miration ' is defined as the origin of sacrifice ; but also the 
hope of profit joins itself. If by sacrificing a goat, or the 
like trifle, to Supreme Jove, you can get Supreme Jove's 
favour, will not that, for one, be a good investment ? Jove 
is sacrificed to, and worshipped, from transcendent admira- 
tion : but also, in part, men of practical nature worship him 
as pumps are primed, give him a little water, that you may 
get from him a river. O god-like Hudson, O god-recognising 
England, why was not the partly anthropomorphous Pyramid 
of Copper cast, then, and set upon the pinnacle of England, 
that all men might have seen it, and the sooner got to under- 
stand these things ! The twenty-five-thousand-pound oblation 
lay upon the altar at the Bank ; this monstrous Copper 
Vishnu of the Scrip Ages might have been revealed to men, 
and was not. Unexpected obstacles occurred. In fact, there 
rose from the general English soul, lying dumb and infinitely 
bewildered, but not yet altogether dead, poor wretch, such 
a growl of inarticulate amazement, at this unexpected Hudson 



258 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Apotheosis, as alarmed the pious worshippers; and their 
Copper Pyramid remains unrealised ; not to be realised to all 
eternity now, or at least not till Chaos come again, and the 
ancient mud-gods have dominion! The Ne- plus -ultra of 
Statue-building was within sight ; but it was not attained, it 
was to be forever unattainable. 

If the world were not properly anarchic, this question 
* Who shall have a Statue ? "* would be one of the greatest and 
most solemn for it. Who is to have a Statue ? means, Whom 
shall we consecrate and set apart as one of our sacred men ? 
Sacred ; that all men may see him, be reminded of him, and, 
by new example added to old perpetual precept, be taught 
what is real worth in man. Whom do you wish us to 
resemble? Him you set on a high column, that all men, 
looking on it, may be continually apprised of the duty you 
expect from them. What man to set there, and what man 
to refuse forevermore the leave to be set there : this, if a 
country were not anarchic as we say, ruleless, given up to 
the rule of Chaos, in the primordial fibres of its being, 
would be a great question for a country ! 

And to the parties themselves, lightly as they set about it, 
the question is rather great. Whom shall I honour, whom 
shall I refuse to honour ? If a man have any precious thing 
in him at all, certainly the most precious of all the gifts he 
can offer is his approbation, his reverence to another man. 
This is his very soul, this fealty which he swears to another : 
his personality itself, with whatever it has of eternal and 
divine, he bends here in reverence before another. Not 
lightly will a man give this, if he is still a man. If he is 
no longer a man, but a greedy blind two-footed animal, 
' without soul, except what saves him the expense of salt and 
keeps his body with its appetites from putrefying * ; alas, if 
he is nothing now but a human money-bag and meat-trough, 
it is different ! In that case his * reverence ' is worth so 
many pounds sterling ; and these, like a gentleman, he will give 



viz.] HUDSON'S STATUE 259 

willingly. Hence the British Statues, such a populace of them 
as we see. British Statues, and some other more important 
things ! Alas, of how many unveracities, of what a world of 
irreverence, of sordid debasement, and death in ' trespasses and 
sins,' is this light unveracious bestowal of one's approbation 
the fatal outcome ! Fatal in its origin ; in its developments 
and thousandfold results so fatal. It is the poison of the 
universal Upas-tree, under which all human interests, in these 
bad ages, lie writhing as if in the last struggle of death. Street- 
barricades rise for that reason, and counterfeit kings have to 
shave-off their whiskers, and fly like coiners ; and it is a world 
gone mad in misery, by bestowing its approbation wrong ! 

Give every man the meed of honour he has merited, you 
have the ideal world of poets; a hierarchy of beneficences, 
your noblest man at the summit of affairs, and in every place 
the due gradation of the fittest for that place : a maximum 
of wisdom works and administers, followed, as is inevitable, 
by a maximum of success. It is a world such as the idle 
poets dream of, such as the active poets, the heroic and the 
true of men, are incessantly toiling to achieve, and more and 
more realise. Achieved, realised, it never can be ; striven after 
and approximated to, it must forever be, woe to us if at any 
time it be not ! Other aim in this Earth we have none. 
Renounce such aim as vain and hopeless, reject it altogether, 
what more have you to reject ? You have renounced fealty 
to Nature and its Almighty Maker ; you have said practically, 
" We can flourish very well without minding Nature and her 
ordinances; perhaps Nature and the Almighty what are 
they? A Phantasm of the brain of Priests, and of some 
chimerical persons that write Books ? ** " Hold ! " shriek 
others wildly : " You incendiary infidels ; you should be 
quiet infidels, and believe ! Haven't we a Church ? Don't 
we keep a Church, this long while ; best-behaved of Churches, 
which meddles with nobody, assiduously grinding its organs, 
reading its liturgies, homiletics, and excellent old moral horn- 
books, so patiently as Church never did ? Can't we doff our 



260 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

hat to it : even look in upon it occasionally, on a wet Sunday; 
and so, at the trifling charge of a few millions annually, serve 
both God and the Devil ? Fools, you should be quiet infidels, 
and believe ! " 

To give our approval aright, alas, to do every one of us 
what lies in him, that the honourable man everywhere, and he 
only have honour, that the able man everywhere be put into 
the place which is fit for him, which is his by eternal right : is 
not this the sum of all social morality for every citizen of this 
world ? This one duty perfectly done, what more could the 
world have done for it ? The world in all departments and 
aspects of it were a perfect world ; everywhere administered 
by the best wisdom discernible in it, everywhere enjoying the 
exact maximum of success and felicity possible for it. Imper- 
fectly, and not perfectly done, we know this duty must always 
be. Not done at all ; no longer remembered as a thing which 
God and Nature and the Eternal Voices do require to be done, 
alas, we see too well what kind of a world that ultimately 
makes for us ! A world no longer habitable for quiet 
persons : a world which in these sad days is bursting into 
street-barricades, and pretty rapidly turning-out its ' Honoured 
Men," 1 as intrusive dogs are turned out, with a kettle tied to 
their tail. To Kings, Kaisers, Spiritual Papas and Holy 
Fathers, there is universal " Apage ! Depart thou ; go thou to 
the Father of thee ! " in a huge world-voice of mob-musketry 
and sooty execration, uglier than any ever heard before. 

Who^s to have a Statue ? The English, at present, answer 
this question in a very off-hand manner. So far as I can 
ascertain the method they have, it is somewhat as follows. 

Of course, among the many idle persons to whom an un- 
fortunate world has given money and no work to do, there 
must be, with or without wisdom (without, for most part), a 
most brisk demand for work. Work to do 'is very desirable, 
for those that have only money and not work. " Alas, one 
cannot buy sleep in the market ! " said the rich Farmer-general. 



vii.] HUDSON'S STATUE 261 

Alas, one cannot buy work there ; work, which is still more 
indispensable. One of these unfortunates with money and no 
work, whose haunts lie in the dilettante line, among Artists' 
Studios, Picture-Sales, and the like regions, an inane king- 
dom much frequented by the inane in these times, him it 
strikes, in some inspired moment, that if a public subscription 
for a Statue to somebody could be started, good results would 
follow. Perhaps some Artist, to whom he is Maecenas, 
might be got to do the Statue ; at all events there would 
be extensive work and stir going on, whereby the inspired 
dilettante, for his own share, might get upon committees, 
see himself named in the newspapers; might assist in in- 
numerable consultations, open utterances of speech and 
balderdash; and, on the whole, be comfortably present, for 
years to come, at something of the nature of ' a house on 
fire ' : house innocuously, nay, beneficently on fire : a very 
Goshen to an idle man with money in his pocket. 

This is the germ of the idea ; now make your idea an 
action. Think of a proper Somebody. Almost anybody much 
heard of in the newspapers, and never yet convicted of felony ; 
a conspicuous commander-in-chief, duke no matter whether 
of Wellington or of York ; successful stump-orator, political 
intriguer ; lawyer that has made two hundred thousand 
pounds ; scrip-dealer that has made two thousand thousand : 
anybody of a large class, we are not particular, he will be 
your proper Somebody. You are then to get a brother idler 
or two to unite his twenty-pound note to yours : the fire is 
kindled, smoke rises through the editorial columns ; the fire, 
if you blow it, will break into flame, and become a comfort- 
able house on fire for you ; solacing the general idle soul, for 
years to come ; and issuing in a big hulk of Corinthian brass, 
and a notable instance of hero-worship, by and by. 

Such I take to be the origin of that extraordinary popula- 
tion of Brazen and other Images which at present dominate 
the market-places of towns, and solicit worship from the 
English people. The ugliest images, and to the strangest 



262 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

class of persons, ever set-up in this world. Do you call these 
demigods ? England must be dreadfully off for demigods ! 
My friend, I will not do the smallest stroke of worship to 
them. One in the thousand I will snatch out of bad com- 
pany, if I ever can ; the other nine hundred and ninety-nine 
I will with pious joy, in the like case, reduce to the state of 
broken metal again, and veil forever from all men. As 
warming-pans, as cheap brass-candlesticks, men will get good 
of this metal ; as devotionary Images in such form, evil only. 
These are not heroes, gods, or demigods ; and it is a horrible 
idolatry, if you knew it, to set them up as such ! 

Are these your Pattern Men ? Great Men ? They are 
your lucky (or unlucky) Gamblers swollen big. Paltry 
Adventurers for most part ; worthy of no worship ; and 
incapable forever of getting any, except from the soul conse- 
crated to flunkyism. Will a man's soul worship that, think 
you ? Never ; if you fashioned him of solid gold, big as 
Benlomond, no heart of a man would ever look upon him 
except with sorrow and despair. To the flunky heart alone 
is he, was he or can he at any time be, a thing to look upon 
with upturned eyes of * transcendent admiration,' worship or 
worthship so-called. He, you unfortunate fools, he is not the 
one we want to be kept in mind of; not he at all by any 
means ! To him and his memory, if you had not been 
unfortunate and blockheads, you would have sunk a coal- 
shaft rather than raised a column. Deep coalshaft, there to 
bury him and his memory, that men might never speak or 
hear of him more ; not a high column to admonish all men 
that they should try to resemble him ! 

Of the sculptural talent manifest in these Brazen Images 
I say nothing, though much were to be said. For indeed, 
if there is no talent displayed in them but a perverse one, are 
not we to consider it a happiness, in that strange case ? This 
big swollen Gambler, and gluttonous hapless * spiritual Daniel 
Lambert,' deserved a coalshaft from his brother mortals : 



vii.] HUDSON'S STATUE 263 

let at least his column be ugly ! Nevertheless ugly columns 
and images are, in themselves, a real evil. They too preach 
ugliness after their sort ; and have a certain effect, the whole 
of which is bad. They sanction and consecrate artistic 
botching, pretentious futility, and the horrible doctrine that 
this Universe is a Cockney Nightmare, which no creature 
ought for a moment to believe, or listen to ! In brief, they 
encourage an already-ugly Population to become in a thousand 
ways uglier. They too, for their ugliness, did not the 
infinitely deeper ugliness of the thing they commemorate 
absorb all consideration of that, would deserve, and do in 
fact incessantly solicit, abolition from the sight of men. 

What good in the aesthetic, the moral, social or any human 
point of view, we are ever to get of these Brazen Images now 
peopling our chief cities and their market-places, it is impos- 
sible to specify. Evil enough we, consciously or unconsciously, 
get of them ; no soul looks upon them approvingly or even 
indifferently without damage, all the deadlier the less he 
knows of it. Simple souls they corrupt in the sources of 
their spiritual being : wise souls, obliged to look on them, 
look with some feeling of anger and just abhorrence ; which 
is itself a mischief to a peaceable man. Good will never be 
got of these Brazen Images in their present form. Of what 
use, till once broken-up and melted into warming-pans, they 
can ever be to gods or men, I own I cannot see. Gods and 
men demand that this, which is their sure ultimate destiny, 
should so soon as possible be realised. 



It is tragically evident to me, our first want, which includes 
all wants, is that of a new real Aristocracy of fact, instead of 
the extinct imaginary one of title, which the anarchic world 
is everywhere rebelling against : but if it is from Popular 
Suffrage that we are to look for such a blessing, is not this 
extraordinary populace of British Statues, which now dominates 
our market-places, one of the saddest omens that ever was ? 



264 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Suffrage announces to us, nothing doubting : " Here are your 
real demigods and heroic men, ye famous British People; 
here are Brazen and other Images worthy once more of some 
worship ; this is the New Aristocracy I have chosen, and 
would choose, for you ! " That is Suffrage's opinion. To me 
this populace of British Statues rises aloft over the Chaos of 
our affairs like the living symbol and consummate flower of 
said Chaos, and silently speaks the mournfulest prophecy. 
Perhaps as strange a Pantheon of brass gods as was ever got 
together in this world. They stand there, poor wretches, 
gradually rusting in the sooty rain; black and dismal, 
when one thinks of them in some haggard mood of the 
imagination, like a set of grisly undertakers come to bury 
the dead spiritualisms of mankind. There stand they, in all 
weathers, indicating to the British Population such a Heaven 
and such an Earth as probably no Population ever had before. 
In the social, political, religious, artistic, and other provinces 
of our affairs, they point towards depths of prostrate abase- 
ment which no man's thought has yet sounded. Let us 
timidly glance thitherward a little ; gaze, for moments, into 
those abysses of spiritual death, which, if we cannot one 
day sound them, and subdue them, will engulf us all ! And 
first as to this recipe of Popular Election. 

Hudson the railway king, if Popular Election be the rule, 
seems to me by far the most authentic king extant in this 
world. Hudson has been * elected by the people ' so as almost 
none other is or was. Hudson solicited no vote ; his votes 
were silent voluntary ones, not liable to be false : he did a 
thing which men found, in their inarticulate hearts, to be 
worthy of paying money for ; and they paid it. What the 
desire of every heart was, Hudson had or seemed to have 
produced : Scrip out of which profit could be made. They 
' voted ' for him by purchasing his scrip with a profit to him. 
Every vote was the spontaneous product of those men's 
deepest insights and most practical convictions, about Hudson 



vii.J HUDSON'S STATUE 265 

and themselves and this Universe : I say, it was not a spoken 
vote, but a silently-acted one ; a vote for once incapable of 
being insincere. What their appetites, intelligences, stupidi- 
ties, and pruriences had taught these men, they authentically 
told you there. I beg you to mark that well. Not by all 
the ballot-boxes in Nature could you have hoped to get, with 
such exactness, from these men, what the deepest inarticulate 
voice of the gods and of the demons in them was, as by this 
their spontaneous purchase of scrip. It is the ultimate 
rectified quintessence of these men's * votes ' : the distillation 
of their very souls ; the sincerest sincerity that was in them. 
Without gratitude to Hudson, or even without thought of 
him, they raised Hudson to his bad eminence, not by their 
voice given once at some hustings under the influence of 
balderdash and beer, but by the thought of their heart, by 
the inarticulate, indisputable dictate of their whole being. 
Hudson inquired of England : " What precious thing can I 
do for you, O enlightened Countrymen ; what may be the 
value to you, by popular election, of this stroke of work that 
lies in me ? " Popular election, with universal, with house- 
hold and other suffrage, free as air, deep as life and death, 
free and deep as spoken suffrage never was or could be, has 
answered : " Pounds sterling to such and such amount ; that 
is the apparent value of thy stroke of work to us, block- 
heads as we are." Real value differs from apparent to a 
frightful extent in this world, try it by what suffrage you 
will! 

Hudson's value as a demigod being what it was, his value 
as a maker of railways shall hardly concern us here. What 
Hudson's real worth to mankind in the matter of railways 
might be I cannot pretend to say. Fact knows it to the 
uttermost fraction, and will pay it him yet ; but men differ 
widely in opinion, and in general do not in the least know. 
From my own private observation and conjecture, I should 
say, Trifling if any worth. 

Much as we love railways, there is one thing undeniable : 



266 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Railways are shifting all Towns of Britain into new places ; 
no Town will stand where it did, and nobody can tell for a 
long while yet where it will stand. This is an unexpected, 
and indeed most disastrous result. I perceive, railways have 
set all the Towns of Britain a-dancing. Reading is coming 
up to London, Basingstoke is going down to Gosport or 
Southampton, Dumfries to Liverpool and Glasgow; while at 
Crewe, and other points, I see new ganglions of human popu- 
lation establishing themselves, and the prophecy of metallurgic 
cities which were not heard of before. Reading, Basingstoke 
and the rest, the unfortunate Towns, subscribed money to 
get railways ; and it proves to be for cutting their own 
throats. Their business has gone elsewhither; and they 
cannot stay behind their business ! They are set a-dancing, 
as I said; confusedly waltzing, in a state of progressive 
dissolution, towards the four winds ; and know not where 
the end of the death-dance will be for them, in what point 
of space they will be allowed to rebuild themselves. That 
is their sad case. 

And what an affair it is in each of the shops and houses 
of those Towns, thus silently bleeding to death, or what we 
call dancing away to other points of the British territory : 
how Joplin of Reading, who had anchored himself in that 
pleasant place, and fondly hoping to live by upholstery and 
paperhanging, had wedded, and made friends there, awakens 
some morning, and finds that his trade has flitted away ! 
Here it is not any longer ; it is gone to London, to Bristol : 
whither has it gone? Joplin knows not whither; knows 
and sees only that gone it is ; and that he by preternatural 
sagacity must scent it out again, follow it over the world, and 
catch it again, or else die. Sad news for Joplin : indeed 
I fear, should his sagacity be too inconsiderable, he is not 
unlikely to break his heart, or take to drinking, in these 
inextricable circumstances ! And it is the history, more or 
less, in every town, house, shop and industrial dwelling-place 
of the British Empire at this moment ; and the cipher of 



VIL] HUDSON'S STATUE 267 

afflicted Joplins ; and the amount of private distress, uncer- 
tainty, discontent ; and withal of ' revolutionary movement/ 
created hereby, is tragical to think of. This is ' revolutionary 
movement ' with a witness ; revolution brought home to every- 
body's hearth and moneysafe and heart and stomach. Which 
miserable result, with so many others from the same source, 
what method was there of avoiding or indefinitely mitigating ? 
This surely, as the beginning of all : that you had made your 
railways not in haste ; that, at least, you had spread the huge 
process, sure to alter all men's mutual position and relations, 
over a reasonable breadth of time ! 

For all manner of reasons, how much could one have 
wished that the making of our British railways had gone on 
with deliberation ; that these great works had made them- 
selves not in five years but in fifty-and-five ! Hudson's 
'worth' to railways, I think, will mainly resolve itself into 
this, That he carried them to completion within the former 
short limit of time ; that he got them made, in extremely 
improper directions I am told, and surely with endless con- 
fusion to the innumerable passive Joplins, and likewise to the 
numerous active scrip-holders, a wide-spread class, once rich, 
now coinless, hastily in five years, not deliberately in fifty- 
five. His worth to railways? His worthy I take it, to 
English railways, much more to English men, will turn out 
to be extremely inconsiderable; to be incalculable damage 
rather ! Foolish railway people gave him two millions, and 
thought it not enough without a Statue to boot. But Fact 
thought, and is now audibly saying, far otherwise ! Rhada- 
manthus, had you been able to consult him, would in nowise 
have given this man twenty -five thousand pounds for a 
Statue. What if Rhadamanthus doomed him rather, let us 
say, to ride in Express-trains, nowhither, for twenty-five aeons, 
or to hang in Heaven as a Locomotive Constellation, and be 
a sign forever ! 

Fact and Suffrage : what a discrepancy ! Fact decided 
for some coalshaft such as we describe. Suffrage decides for 



268 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

such a column. Suffrage having money in its pocket, carries 
it hollow, for the moment. And so there is Rayless Majesty 
exalted far above the chimney-pots, with a potential Copper 
Likeness, twenty-five thousand pounds worth of copper over 
and above; and a King properly belonging only to this 
epoch. That there are greedy blockheads in huge majority, 
in all epochs, is certain ; but that any sane mortal should 
think of counting their heads to ascertain who or what is to 
be King, this is a little peculiar. All Democratic men, and 
members of the Suffrage Movement, it appears to me, are 
called upon to think seriously, with a seriousness approaching 
to despair, of these things. 

Jefferson Brick, the American Editor, twitted me with 
the multifarious patented anomalies of overgrown worthless 
Dukes, Bishops of Durham etc., which poor English Society 
at present labours under, and is made a solecism by. To 
which what answer could I make, except, that surely our 
patented anomalies were some of them extremely ugly, and 
yet, alas, that they were not the ugliest ! I said : " Have 
not you also overgrown anomalous Dukes after a sort, 
appointed not by patent? Overgrown Monsters of Wealth, 
namely ; who have made money by dealing in cotton, dealing 
in bacon, jobbing scrip, digging metal in California; who 
are become glittering man-mountains filled with gold and 
preciosities ; revered by the surrounding flunkies ; invested 
with the real powers of sovereignty; and placidly admitted 
by all men, as if Nature and Heaven had so appointed 
it, to be in a sense godlike, to be royal, and fit to shine 
in the firmament, though their real worth is what? Brick, 
do you know where human creatures reach the supreme 
of ugliness in Idols ? It were hard to know ! We can 
say only, All Idols have to tumble, and the hugest of 
them with the heaviest fall : that is our chief comfort, in 
America as here. 

" The Idol of Somnauth, a mere mass of coarse crockery not 



VIL] HUDSON'S STATUE 269 

worth five shillings of anybody's money, sat like a great 
staring god, with two diamonds for eyes ; worshipped by the 
neighbouring black populations ; a terror and divine mystery 
to all mortals, till its day came. Till at last, victorious in 
the name of Allah, the Commander of the Faithful, riding 
up with grim battle-axe and heart full of Moslem fire, took 
the liberty to smite once, with right force and rage, said 
ugly mass of idolatrous crockery ; which thereupon shivered, 
with unmelodious crash and jingle, into a heap of ugly pot- 
sherds, yielding from its belly half a wagon-load of gold 
coins. You can read it in Gibbon, probably, too, in Lord 
Ellenborough. The gold coins, the diamond eyes, and other 
valuable extrinsic parts were carefully picked -up by the 
Faithful ; confused jingle of intrinsic potsherds was left 
lying; and the Idol of Somnauth once showing what it 
was. had suddenly come to a conclusion ! Thus end all 
Idols, and intrinsically worthless man -mountains never so 
illuminated with diamonds, and filled with precious metals, 
and tremulously worshipped by the neighbouring flunky 
populations black or white ; even thus, sooner or later, 
without fail ; and are shot hastily, as a heap of potsherds, 
into the highway, to be crunched under wagon-wheels, and 
do Macadam a little service, being clearly abolished as gods, 
and hidden from man's recognition, in that or other capacities, 
forever and a day! 

"You do not sufficiently bethink you, my republican 
friend. Our ugliest anomalies are done by universal suffrage, 
not by patent. The express nonsense of old Feudalism, even 
now, in its dotage, is as nothing to the involuntary nonsense 
of modern Anarchy called 'Freedom,' 'Republicanism,' and 
other fine names, which expresses itself by supply and demand ! 
Consider it a little. 

" The Bishop of our Diocese is to me an incredible man ; 
and has, I will grant you, very much more money than you 
or I would now give him for his work. One does not even 
read those Charges of his ; much preferring speech which is 



270 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

articulate. In fact, being intent on a quiet life, you generally 
keep on the other side of the hedge from him, and strictly 
leave him to his own fate. Not a credible man ; perhaps 
not quite a safe man to be concerned with ? But what think 
you of the 'Bobus of Houndsditch' of our parts? He, 
Sausage-maker on the great scale, knows the art of cutting 
fat bacon, and exposing it seasoned with grey pepper to 
advantage. Better than any other man he knows this art ; 
and I take the liberty to say it is a poor one. Well, the 
Bishop has an income of five thousand pounds appointed him 
for his work ; and Bobus, to such a length has he now pushed 
the trade in sausages, gains from the universal suffrage of 
men's souls and stomachs ten thousand a year by it. 

" A poor art, this of Bobus's, I say ; and worth no such 
recompense. For it is not even good sausages he makes, but 
only extremely vendible ones ; the cunning dog ! Judges 
pronounce his sausages bad, and at the cheap price even 
dear; and finer palates, it is whispered, have detected 
alarming symptoms of horseflesh, or worse, under this cun- 
ningly-devised grey-pepper spice of his ; so that for the world 
I would not eat one of his sausages, nor would you. You 
perceive he is not an excellent honest sausage-maker, but a 
dishonest cunning and scandalous sausage-maker; worth, if 
he could get his deserts, who shall say what? Probably 
certain shillings a week, say forty ; possibly (one shudders to 
think) a long round in the treadmill, and stripes instead of 
shillings ! And yet what he gets, I tell you, from universal 
suffrage and the unshackled ne-plus-ultra republican justice of 
mankind, is twice the income of that anomalous Bishop you 
were talking of ! 

" The Bishop I, for my part, do much prefer to Bobus. 
The Bishop has human sense and breeding of various kinds ; 
considerable knowledge of Greek, if you should ever want the 
like of that ; knowledge of many things ; and speaks the 
English language in a grammatical manner. He is bred to 
courtesy, to dignified composure, as to a second nature; a 



VIL] HUDSON'S STATUE 271 

gentleman every fibre of him ; which of itself is something 
very considerable. The Bishop does really diffuse round him 
an influence of decorum, courteous patience, solid adherence to 
what is settled ; teaches practically the necessity of ' burning 
one's own smoke ' ; and does practically in his own case burn 
said smoke, making lambent flame and mild illumination out 
of it, for the good of men in several particulars. While 
Bobus, for twice the annual money, brings sausages, possibly 
of horseflesh, cheaper to market than another ! Brick, if you 
will reflect, it is not ' aristocratic England," it is the united 
Posterity of Adam who are grown, in some essential respects, 
stupider than barbers 1 blocks. Barbers' blocks would at least 
say nothing, and not elevate, by their universal suffrages, an 
unfortunate Bobus to that bad height ! ** 

Alas, if such, not in their loose tongues, but in their heart 
of hearts, is men's way of judging about social worth, what 
kind of ' new Aristocracy ' will the inconcei vablest perfection 
of spoken Suffrage ever yield us ? Suffrage, I perceive 
well, has quite other things in store for us; we need not 
torment poor Suffrage for this thing ! Our Intermittent 
Friend says once : 

' Men do not seem to be aware that this their universal 
ousting of unjust, incapable and in fact imaginary Governors, 
is to issue in the attainment of Governors who have a right 
and a capacity to govern. Far different from that is the 
issue men contemplate in their present revolutionary opera- 
tions. Their universal notion now is, that we shall henceforth 
do without Governors ; that we have got to a new epoch in 
human progress, in which Governing is entirely a superfluity, 
and the attempt at doing it is an offence, think several. By 
that admirable invention of the Constitutional Parliament, 
first struck-out in England, and now at length hotly striven- 
for and zealously imitated in all European countries, the 
task of Government, any task there may still be, is done to 
our hand. Perfect your Parliament, cry all men : apply the 



272 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

Ballot-box and Universal Suffrage ! the adniirablest method 
ever imagined of counting heads and gathering indubitable 
votes : you will thus gather the vote, vox or voice, of all the 
two-legged animals without feathers in your dominion ; what 
they think is what the gods think, is it not ? and this you 
shall go and do. 

* Whereby, beyond dispute, your Governor's task is im- 
mensely simplified ; and indeed the chief thing you can now 
require of your Governor is that he carefully preserve his 
good humour, and do in a handsome manner nothing, or 
some pleasant fugle-motions only. Is not this a " machine " : 
marking new epochs in the progress of discovery ? Machine 
for doing Government too, as we now do all things by 
" machinery." Only keep your free-presses, ballot-boxes, 
upright-shafts and cogwork in an oiled unobstructed con- 
dition ; motive-power of popular wind will do the rest. 
Here verily is a mill that beats Birmingham hollow ; and 
marks " new epochs "" with a witness. What a hopper this ! 
Reap from all fields whatsoever you find standing, thistle- 
downs, dockseed, hemlockseed, wheat, rye ; tumble all into 
the hopper, see, in soft blissful, continuous stream, meal 
shall daily issue for you, and the bread of life to mankind 
be sure ! ' 

The aim of all reformers, parliamentary and other, is still 
defined by them as 'just legislation,' just laws; with which 
definition who can quarrel ? They will not have * class 
legislation," which is a dreadfully bad thing ; but * all-classes 
legislation, 1 1 suppose, which is the right thing. Sure enough, 
just laws are an excellent attainment, the first condition of 
all prosperity for human creatures ; but few reflect how 
extremely difficult such attainment is ! Alas, could we once 
get laws which were just, that is to say, which were the clear 
transcript of the Divine Laws of the Universe itself; so that 
each man were incessantly admonished, under strict penalties, 
by all men, to walk as the Eternal Maker had prescribed ; 
and he alone received honour whom the Maker had made 



VII.] HUDSON'S STATUE 273 

honourable, and whom the Maker had made disgraceful, dis- 
grace : alas, were not here the very * Aristocracy' we seek ? 
A new veritable Hierarchy of Heaven, approximately such in 
very truth, bringing Earth nearer and nearer to the blessed 
Law of Heaven. Heroic men, the Sent of Heaven, once 
more bore rule : and on the throne of kings there sat 
splendent, not King Hudson, or King Popinjay, but the 
Bravest of existing Men ; and on the gibbet there swung as 
a tragic pendulum, admonitory to Earth in the name of 
Heaven, not some insignificant, abject, necessitous outcast, 
who had violently, in his extreme misery and darkness, stolen 
a leg of mutton, but veritably the Supreme Scoundrel of 
the Commonwealth, who in his insatiable greed and bottom- 
less atrocity had long, hoodwinking the poor world, gone 
himself, and led multitudes to go, in the ways of gilded 
human baseness ; seeking temporary profit (scrip, first-class 
claret, social honour, and the like small ware), where only 
eternal loss was possible ; and who now, stripped of all his 
gildings and cunningly-devised speciosities, swung there an 
ignominious detected scoundrel ; testifying aloud to all the 
earth : " Be not scoundrels, not even gilt scoundrels, any one 
of you ; for God, and not the Devil, is verily king, and this 
is where it ends, if even this be the end of it ! " 

O Heaven, O Earth, what an * attainment ' were here, could 
we but hope to see it ! Reformed Parliament, People's 
League, Hume-Cobden agitation, tremendous cheers, new 
Battles of Naseby, French Revolution, and Horrors of French 
Revolution, all things were cheap and light to the attain- 
ment of this. For this were in fact the millennium ; and 
indeed nothing less than this can be it. 

But I say it is dreadfully difficult to attain ! And though 
' class legislation ' is not it, yet, alas, neither is ' all-classes 
legislation' in the least certain to be it. All classes, if they 
happen not to be wise, heroic classes, how, by the cunningest 
jumbling of them together, will you ever get a wisdom or 
heroism out of them ? Once more let me remind you, it is 



274 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

impossible forever. Unwisdom, contradiction to the gods : 
how, from the mere vamping-together of hostile voracities 
and opacities, never so dextrously or copiously combined, can 
or could you expect anything else ? Can any man bring a 
clean thing out of an unclean ? No man. Voracities and 
opacities, blended together in never such cunningly-devised 
proportions, will not yield noblenesses and illuminations ; 
they cannot do it. Parliamentary reform, extension of the 
suffrage ? Good Heavens, how by the mere enlargement of 
your circle of ingredients, by the mere flinging-in of new 
opacities and voracities, will you have a better chance to distil 
a wisdom from that foul caldron, which is merely bigger, not 
by hypothesis better? You will have a better chance to 
distil zero from it ; evil elements from all sides, now more 
completely extinguishing one another, so that mutual destruc- 
tion, like that of the Kilkenny cats, a Parliament which 
produces parliamentary eloquence only, and no social guidance 
either bad or good will be the issue, as we now in these 
years sorrowfully see. 

Universal suffrage : what a scheme to substitute for the 
revelation of God's eternal Law, the official declaration of 
the account of heads ! It is as if men had abdicated their 
right to attempt following the abovesaid Law, and with 
melancholy resignation had agreed to give it up, and take 
temporary peace and good agreement as a substitute. In all 
departments of our affairs it is so, literary, moral, political, 
social ; and in all of them it is and remains eternally wrong. 
In every department, literary, moral, political, social, the man 
that pretends to have what is angrily called a choice of his 
own, which will mean at least some remnant of a feeling in 
him that Nature and Fact do still claim a choice of their 
own, and are like to make it good yet, such man is felt 
as a kind of interloper and dissocial person, who obstructs 
the harmony of affairs, and is out of keeping with the 
universal-suffrage arrangement that has been entered upon. 



VII.] HUDSON'S STATUE 275 

Why not decide it by dice? Universal suffrage for your 
oracle is equivalent to flat despair of answer. Set up such 
oracle, you proclaim to all men : " Friends, there is in Nature 
no answer to your question ; and you don't believe in dice. 
Try to esteem this oracle a divine one, and be thankful that 
you can thereby keep the peace, and go with an answer from 
the shrine of chaotic Chance." 

Peace is good ; but woe to the cowardly caitiff of a man, or 
collection of cowardly caitiffs styling themselves Nation, that 
will have * peace' on these terms ! They will save their 
ignoble skin at the expense of their eternal loyalty to the 
highest God. Peace ? Better war to the knife, war till we 
all die, than such a * peace.' Reject it, my friend, I advise 
thee ; silently swear by God above, that, on earth below, thou 
for thy part never wilt accept it. Be it forever far from us, 
my poor scattered friends. Let us fly to the rocks rather ; 
and silently appealing to the Eternal Heaven, await an hour 
which is full surely coming, when we too shall have grown to 
a respectable * company of poor men,' authorised to rally, 
and with celestial lightning, and with terrestrial steel and 
such good weapons as there may be, spend all OUT blood 
upon it ! 

After all, why was not the Hudson Testimonial completed ? 
As Moses lifted up the Brazen Serpent in the wilderness, why 
was not Hudson's Statue lifted up? Once more I say, it 
might have done us good. Thither too, in a sense, poor 
poison-stricken mortals might have looked, and found some 
healing ! For many reasons, this alarming populace of British 
Statues wanted to have its chief. The liveliest type of Choice 
by Suffrage ever given. The consummate flower of universal 
Anarchy in the Commonwealth, and in the hearts of men : 
was not this Statue such a flower ; or do we look for one 
more perfect and consummate ? 



Of social Hierarchies, and Religions the parent of these, 



276 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

why speak, in presence of social Anarchy such as is here 
symbolised? The Apotheosis of Hudson beckons to still 
deeper gulfs on the religious side of our affairs ; into which 
one shudders to look down. For the eye rests only on the 
blackness of darkness ; and, shrunk to hissing whispers, 
inaudible except to the finer ear, come meanings of the ever- 
lasting tempest, and tones of alti guai. Nor is a certain 
vertigo quite absent from the strongest heads ; a mad impulse 
to take the leap, then, and dwell with Etenial Death, since it 
seems to be the rule at present ! One hurried glance or two, 
holding well by what parapets there still are ; and then 
let us hasten to begone. 

Worship, what we call human religion, has undergone 
various phases in the history of mankind. To the primitive 
man all Forces of Nature were divine : either for propitiation 
or for admiration, many things, and in a sense all things, 
demanded worship from him. But especially the Noble 
Human Soul was divine to him ; and announced, as it ever 
does, with direct impressiveness, the Inspiration of the Highest ; 
demanding worship from the primitive man. Whereby, as 
has been explained elsewhere, this latter form of worship, 
Hero-worship as we call it, did, among the ancient peoples, 
attract and subdue to itself all other forms of human 
worship ; irradiating them all with its own perennial worth, 
which indeed is all the worth they had, or that any worship 
can have. Human worship everywhere, so far as there lay 
any worth in it, was of the nature of a Hero-worship ; this 
Universe wholly, this temporary Flame-image of the Eternal, 
was one beautiful and terrible Energy of Heroisms, presided 
over by a Divine Nobleness or Infinite Hero. Divine Noble- 
ness forever friendly to the noble,' forever hostile to the 
ignoble : all manner of ' moral rules," 1 and well * sanctioned ' 
too, flowed naturally out of this primeval Intuition into 
Nature ; which, I believe, is still the true fountain of moral 
rules, though a much-forgotten one at present ; and indeed 



VII.J HUDSON'S STATUE 277 

it seems to be the one unchangeable, eternally indubitable 
* Intuition into Nature ' we have yet heard of in these parts. 

To the primitive man, whether he looked at moral rule, or 
even at physical fact, there was nothing not divine. Flame 
was the God Loki, etc. ; this visible Universe was wholly the 
vesture of an Invisible Infinite ; every event that occurred in 
it a symbol of the immediate presence of God. Which it 
intrinsically w, and forever will be, let poor stupid mortals 
remember or forget it ! The difference is, not that God has 
withdrawn ; but that men's minds have fallen hebetated, 
stupid, that their hearts are dead, awakening only to some 
life about meal- time and cookery-time; and their eyes are 
grown dim, blinkard, a kind of horn-eyes like those of owls, 
available chiefly for catching mice. 

Most excellent Fitzsmithytrough, it is a long time since I 
have stopped short in admiring your stupendous railway 
miracles. I was obliged to strike work, and cease admiring 
in that direction. Very stupendous indeed ; considerable 
improvement in old roadways and wheel-and-axle carriages ; 
velocity unexpectedly great, distances attainable ditto ditto : 
all this is undeniable. But, alas, all this is still small deer 
for me, my excellent Fitzsmithytrough ; truly nothing more 
than an unexpected take of mice for the owlish part of you 
and me. Distances, you unfortunate Fitz ? The distances 
of London to Aberdeen, to Ostend, to Vienna, are still 
infinitely inadequate to me ! Will you teach me the winged 
flight through Immensity, up to the Throne dark with excess 
of bright ? You unfortunate, you grin as an ape would at 
such a question ; you do not know that unless you can reach 
thither in some effectual, most veritable sense, you are a lost 
Fitzsmithytrough, doomed to Hela's death-realm and the 
Abyss where mere brutes are buried. I do not want cheaper 
cotton, swifter railways ; I want what Novalis calls * God, 
Freedom, Immortality ' : will swift railways, and sacrifices to 
Hudson, help me towards that ? 

As propitiation or as admiration, * worship ' still continues 



278 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

among men, will always continue ; and the phase it has in any 
given epoch may be taken as the ruling phenomenon which 
determines all others in that epoch. If Odin, who ' invented 
runes,* or literatures, and rhythmic logical speech, and taught 
men to despise death, is worshipped in one epoch ; and if 
Hudson, who conquered railway directors, and taught men to 
become suddenly rich by scrip, is worshipped in another, the 
characters of these two epochs must differ a good deal ! Nay, 
the worst of some epochs is, they have along with their real 
worship an imaginary, and are conscious only of the latter as 
worship. They keep a set of gods or fetishes, reckoned 
respectable, to which they mumble prayers, asking themselves 
and others triumphantly, " Are not these respectable gods ? w 
and all the while their real worship, or heart's love and 
admiration, which alone is worship, concentrates itself on 
quite other gods and fetishes, on Hudsons and scrips, for 
instance. Thus is the miserable epoch rendered twice and 
tenfold miserable, and in a manner lost beyond redemption ; 
having superadded to its stupid Idolatries, and brutish forget- 
tings of the true God, which are leading it down daily towards 
ruin, an immense Hypocrisy, which is the quintessence of all 
idolatries and misbeliefs and unbeliefs, and taken refuge under 
that, as under a thing safe ! Europe generally has lain there 
a long time ; England I think for about two hundred years, 
spinning certain cottons notably the while, and thinking it 
all right, which it was very far from being. But the time 
of accounts, slowly advancing, has arrived at last for Europe, 
and is knocking at the door of England too ; and it will be 
seen whether universal make-believe can be the rule in 
English or human things ; whether respectable Hebrew and 
other fetishes, combined with real worship of Yorkshire and 
other scrip, will answer the purpose here below or not ! 

It is certain, whatever gods or fetishes a man may have 
about him, and pay tithes to, and mumble prayers to, the 
real ' religion ' that is in him is his practical Hero-worship. 



VII.J HUDSON'S STATUE 279 

Whom or what do you in your very soul admire, and strive 
to imitate and emulate ; is it God's servant or the Devil's ? 
Clearly this is the whole question. There is no other religion 
in the man which can be of the slightest consequence in com- 
parison. Theologies, doxologies, orthodoxies, heterodoxies, 
are not of moment except as subsidiary towards a good issue 
in this ; if they help well in it, they are good ; if not well or 
at all, they are nothing or bad. 

This also is certain, Nations that do their Hero-worship 
well are blessed and victorious ; Nations that do it ill are 
accursed, and in all fibres of their business grow daily more so, 
till their miserable afflictive and offensive situation becomes at 
last unendurable to Heaven and to Earth, and the so-called 
Nation, now an unhappy Populace of Misbelievers (miscreants 
was the old name), bursts into revolutionary tumult, and either 
reforms or else annihilates itself. How otherwise ? Know 
whom to honour and emulate and follow ; know whom to 
dishonour and avoid, and coerce under hatches, as a foul 
rebellious thing : this is all the Law and all the Prophets. 
All conceivable evangels, bibles, homiletics, liturgies and 
litanies, and temporal and spiritual lawbooks for a man 
or a people, issue practically there. Be right in that, 
essentially you are not wrong in anything; you read this 
Universe tolerably aright, and are in the way to interpret 
well what the will of its Maker is. Be wrong in that, had 
you liturgies the recommendablest in Nature, and bodies-of- 
divinity as big as an Indiaman, it helps you not a whit ; you 
are wrong in all things. 

How in anything can you be right ? You read this Uni- 
verse in the inmost meaning of it wrong : gross idolatrous 
Misbelief is what I have to recognise in you ; and, super- 
added, such a faith in the saving virtue of that deadliest of 
vices, Hypocrisy, as no People ever had before ! Beautiful 
recommendable liturgies? Your liturgies, the recommend- 
ablest in Nature, are to me alarming and distressing ; a 
turning of the Calmuck Prayer-mill, not my way of praying. 



280 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

This immense asthmatic spiritual Hurdygurdy, issuing practi- 
cally in a set of demigods like Hudson, what is the good of it ; 
why will you keep grinding it under poor men's windows ? 
Since Hudson w Vishnu, let the Shasters and Vedas be con- 
formable to him. Why chant divine psalms which belonged 
to a different Dispensation, and are now become idle and far 
worse ? Not melodious to me, such a chant, in such a time ! 
The sound of it, if you are not yet quite dead to spiritual 
sounds, is frightful and bodeful. I say, this litany of yours, 
were the wretched populace and population never so unani- 
mous and loud in it, is a thing no God can hear ; your miser- 
able ' religion," 1 as you call it, is an idolatry of the nature of 
Mumbojumbo, and I would advise you to discontinue it 
rather. You are Infidels, persons without faith ; not believ- 
ing what is true but what is untrue ; Miscreants, as the old 
fathers well called you, appointed too inevitably, unless you 
can repent and alter soon (of which I see no symptoms), to a 
fearful doom ! 

" It was always so,"" you indolently say ? No, Friend 
Heavyside, it was not always so, and even till lately was never 
so ; and I would much recommend you to sweep that foolish 
notion, which you often fling at me, and always keep about 
you as one of your main consolations, quite out of your head. 
Once the notion was my own too ; I know the notion very 
well ! And I will invite you to ask yourself in all ways, 
Whether it is not possibly a rather torpid and poisonous, and 
likewise an altogether incorrect and delusive notion ? Capable, 
I assure you, of being quite swept out of a man's head ; and 
greatly needing to be so, if the man would do any ' reform,' 
or other useful work, in this his day ! 

Till such notion go about its business, there cannot even 
be the attempt towards reform. Not so much as the pulling 
down, and melting into warming-pans, of those poor Brazen 
Representatives of Anarchy can be accomplished ; but they 
will stand there prophesying as now, " Here is the * New 
Aristocracy' you want; down on your knees, ye Christian 



vil.] HUDSON'S STATUE 281 

souls ! " O my friend, and after Hudson and the other Idols 
have quite gone to warming-pans, have you computed what 
agonistic centuries await us, before any 'New Aristocracy 1 
worth calling by the name of * real,' can by likelihood prove 
attainable? From the stormful trampling-down of Sham 
Human Worth, and casting it with wrath and scorn into the 
meltingpot, onward to the silent sad repentant recognition of 
Real Human Worth, and the capability of again doing that 
some pious reverence, some reverence which were not practi- 
cally worse than none : have you measured what an interval 
is there ? Centuries of desperate wrestle against Earth and 
Hell, on the part of all the brave men that are born. Too 
true this, though figuratively spoken ! Perilous tempestuous 
struggle and pilgrimage, continual marching battle with the 
mud -serpents of this Earth and the demons of the Pit 
centuries of such a marching fight (continually along the edge 
of Red Republic too, and the Abyss) as brave men were not 
often called to in History before ! And the brave men will 
not yet so much as gird-on their harness ? They sit indolently 
saying, " It is already all as it can be, as it was wont to be ; 
and universal suffrage and tremendous cheers will manage 
it!" 

Collins's old Peerage-Book, a dreadfully dull production, 
fills one with unspeakable reflections. Beyond doubt a most 
dull production, one of the darkest in the book kind ever 
realised by Chaos and man's brain ; and it is properly all we 
English have for a Biographical Dictionary ; nay, if you 
think farther of it, for a National Bible. Friend Heavyside 
is much astonished ; but I see what I mean here, and have 
long seen. Clear away the dust from your eyes, and you will 
ask this question, What is the Bible of a Nation, the 
practically-credited God's-Message to a Nation ? Is it not, 
beyond all else, the authentic Biography of its Heroic Souls ? 
This is the real record of the Appearances of God in the 
History of a Nation ; this, which all men to the very marrow 



282 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

of their bones can believe, and which teaches all men what 
the nature of the Universe, when you go to work in it, 
really is. What the Universe was thought to be in Judea 
and other places, this too may be very interesting to know : 
but what it is in England here where we live and have 
our work to do, that is the interesting point. " The Uni- 
verse ? " M'Croudy answers. " It is a huge dull Cattle-stall 
and St. Catherine's Wharf; with a few pleasant apartments 
upstairs for those that can make money. Make money ; 
and don't bother about the Universe ! " That is M'Croudy's 
notion ; reckoned a quiet, innocent and rather wholesome 
notion just now ; yet clearly fitter for a reflective pig than 
for a man ; working continual damnation therefore, how- 
ever quiet it be ; and indeed I perceive it is one of the 
damnablest notions that ever came into the head of any 
two- legged animal without feathers in this world. That 
is M'Croudy's Bible ; his Apology, poor fellow, for the Want 
of a Bible. 

But how, among so many Shakspeares, and thinkers, and 
heroic singers, our National Bible should be in such a state ; 
and how a poor dull Bookseller should have been left, not 
to write in rhythmic coherency, worthy of a Poet and of all 
our Poets, but to shovel together, or indicate, in huge 
rubbish mountains incondite as Chaos, the materials for 
writing such a Book of Books for England : this is abun- 
dantly amazing to me, and I wish much it could duly amaze 
us all. Literature has no nobler task ; in fact it has that 
one task, and except it be idle rope-dancing, no other. ' The 
highest problem of Literature,' says Novalis, very justly, * is 
the Writing of a Bible.' 

Nevertheless, among these dust-mountains, with their anti- 
quarian excerpts and sepulchral brasses, it is astonishing what 
strange fragments you do turn up, miraculous talismans to a 
reader that will think, windows through which an old sunk 
world, as yet all built upon veracity, and full of rugged 
nobleness, becomes visible ; to the mute wonder of the modern 



VII.] HUDSON'S STATUE 283 

mind. It struck me much, that of these ancient peerages a 
very great majority had visibly had authentic ' heroes' for 
their founders ; noble men, of whose worth no clearsighted 
King could be in doubt ; and that, in their descendants too, 
there did not cease a strain of heroism for some time, the 
peership generally dying out, and disappearing, not long 
after that ceased. What a world, that old sunk one ; Real 
Governors governing in it ; Shams not yet anywhere recog- 
nised, as tolerable in it ! A world whose practical president 
was not Chaos with ballot-boxes, whose outcome was not 
Anarchy plus a street-constable. In how high and true a 
sense, the Almighty with continual enforcement of his Laws 
still presided there ; and in all things as yet there was some 
degree of blessedness and nobleness there ! 

One's heart is sore to think how far, how very far all 
this has vanished from us ; how the very tradition of it has 
disappeared ; and it has ceased to be credible, to seem 
desirable. Till the like of it return, yes, my constitutional 
friend, such is the sad fact, till the like of it, in new form, 
adapted to the new times, be again achieved by us ; we are 
not properly a society at all ; we are a lost gregarious horde, 
with Kings of Scrip on this hand, and Famishing Connaughts 
and Distressed Needlewomen on that presided over by the 
Anarch Old. A lost horde, who, in bitter feeling of the 
intolerable injustice that presses upon all men, will not long 
be able to continue even gregarious ; but will have to split 
into street-barricades, and internecine battle with one another ; 
and to fight, if wisdom for some new real Peerage be not 
granted us, till we all die, mutually butchered, and so rest, 
so if not otherwise ! 

Till the time of James the First, I find that real heroic 
merit more or less was actually the origin of peerages ; never, 
till towards the end of that bad reign, were peerages bar- 
gained for, or bestowed on men palpably of no worth except 
their money or connexion. But the evil practice, once 
begun, spread rapidly ; and now the Peerage-Book is what 



284 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

we see ; a thing miraculous in the other extreme. A 
kind of Proteus' flock, very curious to meet upon the lofty 
mountains, so many of them being natives of the deep! 
Our menagerie of live Peers in Parliament is like that of 
our Brazen Statues in the market-place ; the selection seem- 
ingly is made much in the same way, and with the same 
degree of felicity, and successful accuracy in choice. Our 
one steady regulated supply is the class definable as Supreme 
Stump-Orators in the Lawyer department; the class called 
Chancellors flows by something like fixed conduits towards 
the Peerage; the rest, like our Brazen Statues, come by 
popular rule-of-thumb. 

Stump-Orators, supreme or other, are not beautiful to me 
in these days : but the immense power of Lawyers among us 
is sufficiently intelligible. I perceive, it proceeds from two 
causes. First, they preside over the management and security 
of * Property,' which is our God at present ; they are thus 
properly our Pontiffs, the highest Priests we have. Then 
furthermore they possess the talent most valued, that of the 
Tongue ; and seem to us the most gifted of our intelligences, 
thereby provoking a spontaneous loyalty and worship. 

What think you of a country whose kings go by genealogy, 
and are the descendants of successful Lawyers? A poor 
weather-worn, tanned, curried, wind -dried human creature, 
called a Chancellor, all or almost all gone to horsehair and 
officiality; the whole existence of him tanned, by long 
maceration, public exposure, tugging and manipulation, to 
the toughness of Yorkshire leather, meseems I have seen 
a beautifuler man ! Not a leather man would I by prefer- 
ence appoint to beget my kings. Not lovely to me is the 
leather species of men ; to whose tanned soul God's Universe 
has become a jangling logic-cockpit and little other. If 
indeed it have not become far less and worse : for the 
wretched tanned Chancellor, I am told, is usually acquainted 
with the art of lying too, considerable part of his trade, 
as I have been informed, is the talent of lying in a way that 



VII.] HUDSON'S STATUE 285 

cannot be laid hold of ; a dreadful trick to learn ! Out of 
such a man there cannot be expected much * revelation of the 
Beautiful/ I should say. O Bull, were I in your place, I 
would try either to get other Peers, or else to abolish the 
concern, which latter indeed, by your acquiescence in such 
nominations, and by many other symptoms, I judge to be 
unconsciously your fixed intention. 

You have seen many Chancellors made Peers in these late 
generations, Mr. Bull. And now tell me, which was the 
Chancellor you did really love or honour, to any remarkable 
degree ? Alas, you never within authentic memory loved any 
of them ; you couldn't, no man could ! You lazily stared 
with some semblance of admiration at the big wig, huge 
purse, reputation for divine talent, and sublime proficiency in 
the art of tongue-fence : but to love him, that, Mr. Bull, 
was, once for all, a thing you could not manage. Who of 
the seed of Adam could ? From the time of Chancellor 
Bacon downwards (and beyond that your Chancellors are 
dark to you as the Muftis of Constantinople), I challenge you 
to show me one Chancellor for whom, had the wigs, purses, 
reputations etc., been peeled off him, who would have given 
his weight in Smithfield beef sinking offal. You unhappy 
Bull, governed by Kings you have not the smallest regard 
for; wandering in an extinct world of wearisome, oppressive 
and expensive shadows, nothing real in it but the Smith- 
field beef, nothing preternatural in it but the Chartisms 
and threatened street-barricades, and this not celestial but 
infernal ! 

Sure enough, I find, O Heavyside, England once was a 
Hierarchy ; as every Human Society, not either dead or else 
hastening towards death, always is : but it has long ceased to 
be so to any tolerable degree of perfection ; and is now, by 
its Hudson and other Testimonials, testifying in a silent way 
to the thoughtful, what otherwise, by its thousandfold 
anarchic depravities, miseries, god-forgettings and open devil- 



286 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

worships, it has long loudly taught them to expect, that we 
are now wending towards the culmination in this particular. 
That to the modern English populations, Supreme Hero 
and Supreme Scoundrel are, perhaps as nearly as is possible 
to human creatures, indistinguishable. That it is totally 
uncertain, perhaps even the odds against you, whether the 
figure whom said population mount to the place of honour, 
is not in Nature and Fact ^honourable ; whether the man 
to whom they raise a column does not deserve a coalshaft. 
And in fine, poor devils, that their universal suffrage, as 
spoken, as acted, meditated, and imagined ; universal suffrage, 
I do not say ballot-boxed and cunningly constitutionalised, 
but boiled, distilled, digested, quintessenced, till you get into 
the very heart's heart of it, is, to the rational soul, except 
for stock-exchange, and the like very humble practical pur- 
poses, worth express zero, or nearly so. I think probably as 
near zero as the unassisted human faculties and destinies ever 
came, or are like to come. 

Hierarchy ? O Heaven ! If Chaos himself sat umpire, what 
better could he do? Here are a set of human demigods, 
as if chosen to his hand. Hierarchy with a vengeance ! 
if instead of God, a vulpine beggarly Beelzebub or swollen 
Mammon were our Supreme Hieros or Holy, this would be a 
Hierarchy ! I say, if you want Chaos for your master, adopt 
this; if you don't, I beg you make haste to adopt some 
other ; for this is the broad way to him ! The Eternal 
Anarch, with his old waggling addlehead full of mere windy 
rumour, and his old insatiable paunch full of mere hunger and 
indigestion tragically blended, and the hissing discord of all 
the Four Elements persuasively pleading to him, he, set to 
choose, would be very apt to vote for such a set of demigods 
to you. 



As to the Statues, I know they are but symptoms of 
Anarchy; it is not they, it is the Anarchy, that one is 



VIL] HUDSON'S STATUE 287 

anxious to see abated. Remedy for the Statues will be 
possible; and, as a small help, undoubtedly it too, in the 
mean time, is desirable. Every symptom you drive-in being 
a curtailment of the malady, by all means cure this Statue- 
building if you can ! It will be one folly and misery less. 

Government is loath to interfere with the pursuits of any 
class of citizens ; and oftenest looks on in silence while 
follies are committed. But Government does interfere to 
prevent afflictive accumulations on the streets, malodorous or 
other unsanitary public procedures of an extensive sort ; 
regulates gully-drains, cesspools; prohibits the piling-up of 
dung-heaps ; and is especially strict on the matter of indecent 
exposures. Wherever the health of the citizens is concerned, 
much more where their souls' health, and as it were their 
very salvation, is concerned, all Governments that are not 
chimerical make haste to interfere. 

Now if dungheaps laid on the streets, afflictive to the mere 
nostrils, are a subject for interference, what, we ask, are high 
columns, raised by prurient stupidity and public delusion, to 
blockheads whose memory does in eternal fact deserve the 
sinking of a coalshaft rather ? Give to every one what he 
deserves, what really is his : in all scenes and situations thou 
shalt do that, or in very truth woe will betide thee, as sure 
as thou art living, and as thy Maker lives. Blockhead, this 
big Gambler swollen to the edge of bursting, he is not * great ' 
and honourable ; he is huge and abominable ! Thou shalt 
honour the right man, and not honour the wrong, under 
penalties of an alarming nature. Honour Barabbas the 
Robber, thou shalt sell old-clothes through the cities of the 
world ; shalt accumulate sordid moneys, with a curse on every 
coin of them, and be spit upon for eighteen hundred years. 
Raise statues to the swollen Gambler as if he were great, 
sacrifice oblations to the King of Scrip, unfortunate mortals, 
you will dearly pay for it yet. Quiet as Nature's counting- 
house and scrip-ledgers are, no faintest item is ever blotted 



288 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

out from them, for or against ; and to the last doit that 
account too will have to be settled. Rigorous as Destiny ; 
she M Destiny. Chancery or Fetter-Lane is soft to her, 
when the day of settlement comes. With her, in the way of 
abatement, of oblivion, neither gods nor man prevail. " Abate- 
ment ? That is not our way of doing business ; the time 
has run out, the debt it appears is due." Will the law of 
gravitation * abate ' for you ? Gravitation acts at the rate 
of sixteen feet per second, in spite of all prayers. Were it 
the crash of a Solar System, or the fall of a Yarmouth 
Herring, all one to gravitation. 

Is the fall of a stone certain ; and the fruit of an unwisdom 
doubtful ? You unfortunate beings ! Have you forgotten 
it ; in this immense improvement of machinery, cheapening of 
cotton, and general astonishing progress of the species lately ? 
With such extension of journals, human cultures, universities, 
periodic and other literatures, mechanics'" institutes, reform of 
prison-discipline, abolition of capital punishment, enfranchise- 
ment by ballot, report of parliamentary speeches, and singing 
for the million ? You did not know that the Universe had 
laws of right and wrong ; you fancied the Universe was an 
oblivious greedy blockhead, like one of yourselves ; attentive 
to scrip mainly ; and willing, where there was no practical 
scrip, to forget and forgive ? And so, amid such universal 
blossoming-forth of useful knowledges, miraculous to the 
thinking editor everywhere, the soul of all ' knowledge, 1 not 
knowing which a man is dark and reduced to the condition 
of a beaver, has been omitted by you ? You have omitted 
it, and you should have included it ! The thinking editor 
never missed it, so busy wondering and worshipping elsewhere ; 
but it is not here. 

And alas, apart from editors, are there not men appointed 
specially to keep you in mind of it ; solemnly set apart for 
that object, thousands of years ago ? Crabbe, descanting * on 
the so-called Christian ClerusJ has this wild passage : 
* Legions of them, in their black or other gowns I still meet 



vii.] HUDSON'S STATUE 289 

in every country ; masquerading, in strange costume of body, 
and still stranger of soul ; mumming, primming, grimacing, 
poor devils, shamming, and endeavouring not to sham : that 
is the sad fact. Brave men many of them, after their sort ; 
and in a position which we may admit to be wonderful and 
dreadful ! On the outside of their heads some singular head- 
gear, tulip-mitre, felt coalscuttle, purple hat ; and in the 
inside, I must say, such a Theory of God Almighty's 
Universe as I, for my share, am right thankful to have no 
concern with at all ! I think, on the whole, as broken- 
winged, self-strangled, monstrous a mass of incoherent in- 
credibilities, as ever dwelt in the human brain before. O 
God, giver of Light, hater of Darkness, of Hypocrisy and 
Cowardice, how long, how long ! 

' For two centuries now it lasts. The men whom God has 
made, whole nations and generations of them, are steeped in 
Hypocrisy from their birth upwards; taught that external 
varnish is the chief duty of man, that the vice which is the 
deepest in Gehenna is the virtue highest in Heaven. Out of 
which, do you ask what follows ? Look round on a world 
all bristling with insurrectionary pikes ; Kings and Papas 
flying like detected coiners ; and in their stead Icaria, Red 
Republic, new religion of the Anti- Virgin, Literature of 
Desperation curiously conjoined with Phallus- Worship, too 
clearly heralding centuries of bottomless Anarchy : hitherto 
one in the million looking with mournful recognition on it, 
silently with sad thoughts too unutterable ; and to help in 
healing it not one anywhere hitherto/ 

But as to Statues, I really think the Woods-and-Forests 
ought to interfere. When a company of persons have 
determined to set-up a Brazen Image, there decidedly arises, 
besides the question of their own five-pound subscriptions, 
which men of spirit and money-capital without employment, 
and with the prospect of seeing their names in the Newspapers 
at the cheap price of five pounds, are very prompt with, 



290 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

another question, not nearly so easy of solution. Namely, 
this quite preliminary question : Will it permanently profit 
mankind to have such a Hero as this of yours set-up for their 
admiration, for their imitation and emulation ; or will it, so 
far as they do not reject and with success disregard it 
altogether, unspeakably tend to damage and disprofit them ? 
In a word, does this Hero's memory deserve a high column ; 
are you sure it does not deserve a deep coalshaft rather? 
This is an entirely fundamental question ! Till this question 
be answered well in the affirmative, there ought to be a total 
stop of progress ; the misguided citizens ought to be ad- 
monished, and even gently constrained, to take back their 
five-pound notes ; to desist from their rash deleterious enter- 
prise, and retire to their affairs, a repentant body of misguided 
citizens. 

But farther still, and supposing the first question perfectly 
disposed of, there comes a second, grave too, though much 
less peremptory : Is this Statue of yours a worthy commemo- 
ration of a sacred man ? Is it so excellent in point of Art 
that we can, with credit, set it up in our market-places as a 
respectable approach to the Ideal ? Or, alas, is it not such 
an amorphous brazen sooterkin, bred of prurient heat and 
darkness, as falls, if well seen into, far below the Real ? The 
Real, if you will stand by it, is respectable. The coarsest 
hob-nailed pair of shoes, if honestly made according to the 
laws of fact and leather, are not ugly ; they are honest, and 
fit for their object ; the highest eye may look on them without 
displeasure, nay, with a kind of satisfaction. This rude 
packing-case, it is faithfully made ; square to the rule, and 
formed with rough-and-ready strength against injury ; fit 
for its use ; not a pretentious hypocrisy, but a modest service- 
able fact ; whoever pleases to look upon it, will find the 
image of a humble manfulness in it, and will pass on with 
some infinitesimal impulse to thank the gods. 

But this your * Ideal, 1 my misguided fellow-citizens ? Good 
Heavens, are you in the least aware what damage, in the 



VH.J HUDSON'S STATUE 291 

very sources ot their existence, men get from Cockney 
Sooterkins saluting them publicly as models of Beauty ? I 
charitably feel you have not the smallest notion of it, or you 
would shriek at the proposal ! Can you, my misguided 
friends, think it humane to set-up, in its present uncomfort- 
able form, this blotch of mismolten copper and zinc, out of 
which good warming-pans might be made? That all men 
should see this ; innocent young creatures, still in arms, be 
taught to think this beautiful ; and perhaps women in an 
interesting situation look up to it as they pass ? I put it to 
your religious feeling, to your principles as men and fathers 
of families ! 

These questions the Woods-and-Forests, or some other 
Public Tribunal constituted for the purpose, really ought to 
ask, in a deliberate speaking manner, on the part of the 
speechless suffering Populations : it is the preliminary of all 
useful Statue-building. Till both these questions are well 
answered, the Woods-and-Forests should refuse permission; 
advise the misguided citizens to go home and repent. Really, 
if this Statue-humour go on, and grow as it has lately done, 
there will be such a Public-Statue Board requisite; or the 
Woods-and-Forests will have to interfere, with such imperfect 
law as now is. 

The Woods-and-Forests, or if not they, then the Commis- 
sioners of Sewers, Sanitary Board, Scavenger Board, Cleansing 
Committee, or whoever holds or can usurp a little of the aedile 
authority, cannot some of them, in the name of sense and 
common decency, interfere at least thus far? Namely, to 
admonish the misguided citizens, subscribers to the next 
Brazen Monster, or sad sculptural solecism, the emblem of far 
sadder moral ones ; and exhort them, three successive times, 
to make warming-pans of it and repent ; or failing that, 
finding them obstinate, to say with authority : " Well then, 
persist ; set-up your Brazen Calf, ye misguided citizens, and 
worship it, you, since you will and can. But observe, let it 
be done in secret : not in public ; we say, in secret, at your 



292 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. VH. 

peril ! You have pleased to create a new Monster into this 
world ; but to make him patent to public view, we, for our 
part, beg not to please. Observe, therefore. Build a high- 
enough brick case or joss-house for your Brazen Calf; with 
undiaphanous walls, and lighted by sky-windows only : put 
your Monster into that, and keep him there. Thither go at 
your pleasure, there assemble yourselves, and worship your 
bellyful, you absurd idolaters ; ruin your own souls only, and 
leave the poor Population alone ; the poor speechless un- 
conscious Population, whom we are bound to protect, and 
will ! " To this extent, I think the Woods-and-Forests might 
reasonably interfere. 



NO. vm 
JESUITISM 

[1ST AUGUST 1850] 

As in the history of human things, which needs above all to 
abridge itself, it happens usually that the chief actors in 
great events and great epochs give their name to the series, 
and are loosely reputed the causers and authors of them ; as 
a German Reformation is called of Luther, and a French 
Reign of Terror passes for the work of Robespierre, and 
from the JEfadd and earlier this has been the wont : so it 
may be said these current, and now happily moribund, times of 
ours are worthy to be called, in loose language, the Age of 
Jesuitism, an epoch whose Palinurus is the wretched mortal 
known among men as Ignatius Loyola. For some two cen- 
turies the genius of mankind has been dominated by the 
gospel of Ignatius, perhaps the strangest and certainly among 
the fatalest ever preached hitherto under the sun. Some 
acquaintance, out of Bartoli and others, I have made with 
that individual, and from old years have studied the workings 
of him ; and to me he seems historically definable, he more 
than another, as the poison-fountain from which these rivers 
of bitterness that now submerge the world have flowed. 

Counting from the * ever-blessed Restoration,' or the advent 
of that singular new Defender of the Faith called Charles 
Second, it is about two hundred years since we ourselves 
commenced that bad course ; and deeply detesting the name 
of St. Ignatius, did nevertheless gradually adopt his gospel as 
the real revelation of God's will, and the solid rule of living 
in this world; rule long since grown perfectly accredited, 
complete in all its parts, and reigning supreme among us in all 



294 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

spiritual and social matters whatsoever. The singular gospel, 
or revelation of God's will ! That to please the supreme 
Fountain of Truth your readiest method, now and then, was 
to persist in believing what your whole soul found to be 
doubtful or incredible. That poor human symbols were 
higher than the God Almighty's facts they symbolised ; that 
formulas, with or without the facts symbolised by them, were 
sacred and salutary ; that formulas, well persisted in, could 
still save us when the facts were all fled ! A new revelation 
to mankind ; not heard of in human experience, till Ignatius 
revealed it to us. That, in substance, was the contribution 
of Ignatius to the wellbeing of mankind. Under that 
thrice-stygian gospel we have all of us, Papist and at length 
Protestant too, this long while sat ; a ' doctrine of devils,' I 
do think, if there ever was one ; and are now, ever since 
1789, with endless misery and astonishment, confusedl}' 
awakening out of the same, uncertain whether towards swift 
agony of social death, or towards slow martyrdom of recovery 
into spiritual and social life. 

Not that poor Loyola did all the feat himself, any more 
than Luther, Robespierre, and other such did in the parallel 
cases. By no means. Not in his poor person shall the 
wretched Loyola bear the guilt of poisoning the world : the 
world was, as it were, in quest of poison ; in the sure course 
of being poisoned ; and would have got it done by some one : 
Loyola is the historical symbol to us of its being done. The 
most conspicuous and ostentatious of the world's poisoners ; 
who, solemnly consecrating all the rest in the name of holi- 
ness or spiritual Health, has got the work of poisoning to go 
on with never-imagined completeness and acceleration in all 
quarters ; and is worthy to have it called after him a 
Jesuitism, and be blamed by men (how judged by God, we 
know not) for doing it. That it is done, there is the sad 
fact for us ; which infinitely concerns every living soul of us ; 
what Ignatius got or is to get for doing it, this shall not 
concern us at all. 



vni.] JESUITISM 295 

And so, before dismissing busy English readers to their 
autumnal grouse-shooting, the ramadhan, sacred fast, or 
month of meditative solitude and devout prayer, now in use 
among the English, I have one sad thing to do : lead them 
a little to the survey of Ignatius and our universal Jesuitism ; 
and ask them, in Heaven's name, if they will answer such a 
question, What they think of it, and of their share in it ? 
For this is the central and parent phenomenon ; the great 
Tartarean Deep, this, whence all our miseries, fatuities, 
futilities spring ; the accursed Hela's realm, tenanted by foul 
creatures, ministers of Death Eternal, out of which poor 
mortals, each for himself, are called to escape if they can ! 
Who is there that can escape ; that can become alive to the 
terrible necessity of escaping ? By way of finish to this 
offensive and alarming set of Pamphlets, I have still one 
crowning offence and alarm to try if I can give. The 
message, namely, That under all those Cannibal Connaughts, 
Distressed Needlewomen, and other woes nigh grown intoler- 
able, there lies a still deeper Infinite of woe and guilt, charge- 
able on every one of us ; and that till this abate, essentially 
those never will or can. 

That our English solitaries, any noticeable number of 
them, in their grouse ramadhan, or elsewhere, will accept the 
message, and see this thing for my poor showing, is more 
than I expect. Not willingly or joyfully do men become con- 
scious that they are afloat, they and their affairs, upon the 
Pool of Erebus, now nameless in polite speech ; and that all 
their miseries, social and private, are fountains springing out 
of that, and like to spring perennially with ever more copious- 
ness, till once you get away from that ! And yet who 

knows ? Here and there a thinking English soul, the reflec- 
tion, the devotion, not yet quite deafened out of him by 
perpetual noise and babble ; such a soul, left silent in the 
solitude of some Highland corry, waiting perhaps till the 
gillies drive his deer up to him, may catch a glimpse of it, 
take a thought of it ; may prosecute his thought ; fling down, 



296 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

with terror, his Joe-Manton and percussion-caps, and fly to a 
better kind of ramadhan, towards another kind of life ! Sure 
enough, if one in the thousand see at all, in this sad matter, 
what I see and have long seen in it, his life either suddenly or 
gradually will alter in several particulars ; and his sorrow, 
apprehension and amazement will probably grow upon him, 
the longer he considers this affair ; and his life, I think, will 
alter ever farther ; and he, this one in a thousand, will 
forgive me, and be thankful to the Heavens and me, while he 
continues in this world or in any world ! 

The Spiritual, it is still often said, but is not now suffi- 
ciently considered, is the parent and first-cause of the Practical. 
The Spiritual everywhere originates the Practical, models it, 
makes it : so that the saddest external condition of affairs, 
among men, is but evidence of a still sadder internal one. 
For as thought is the life-fountain and motive-soul of action, 
so, in all regions of this human world, whatever outward 
thing offers itself to the eye, is merely the garment or body 
of a thing which already existed invisibly within ; which, 
striving to give itself expression, has found, in the given 
circumstances, that it could and would express itself so. 
This is everywhere true; and in these times when men's 
attention is directed outward rather, this deserves far more 
attention than it will receive. 

Do you ask why misery abounds among us ? I bid you 
look into the notion we have formed for ourselves of this 
Universe, and of our duties and destinies there. If it is 
a true notion, we shall strenuously reduce it to practice, 
for who dare or can contradict \L\sJaith, whatever it may 
be, in the Eternal Fact that is around him ? and thereby 
blessings and success will attend us in said Universe, or 
Eternal Fact we live amidst: of that surely there is no 
doubt. All revelations and intimations, heavenly and earthly, 
assure us of that ; only a Philosophy of Bedlam could throw 
a doubt on that ! Blessings and success, most surely, if 



viii.] JESUITISM 297 

our notion of this Universe, and our battle in it be a 
true one; not curses and futilities, except it be not true. 
For battle, in any case, I think we shall not want; harsh 
wounds, and the heat of the day, we shall have to stand : 
but it will be a noble godlike and human battle, not an 
ignoble devil-like and brutal one ; and our wounds, and sore 
toils (what we in our impatience call * miseries '), will them- 
selves be blessed to us. 

But if, on the other hand, it were a false notion which we 
believed ; alas, if it were even a false notion which we only 
pretended to believe? What battle can there be, in that 
latter fatal case ! Our faith, or notion of this Universe, is 
not false only, but it is the father of falsity ; a thing that 
destroys itself, and is equivalent to the death of all notion, 
all belief or motive to action, except what the appetites and 
the astucities may yield. We have then the thrice-baleful 
Universe of Cant, prophesied for these Latter Days ; and no 
' battle,' but a kind of bigger Donnybrook one, is possible for 
hapless mortals till that alter. Faith, Fact, Performance, in 
all high and gradually in all low departments, go about their 
business ; Inanity well tailored and upholstered, mild-spoken 
Ambiguity, decorous Hypocrisy which is astonished you should 
think it hypocritical, taking their room and drawing their 
wages : from zenith to nadir, you have Cant, Cant, a Uni- 
verse of Incredibilities which are not even credited, which 
each man at best only tries to persuade himself that he 
credits. Do you expect a divine battle, with noble victories, 
out of this? I expect a Hudson's Statue from it, brisk 
trade in scrip, with Distressed Needlewomen, Cannibal Con- 
naughts, and other the like phenomena, such as we now 
everywhere see ! 

Indisputably enough, what notion each forms of the Uni- 
verse is the all-regulating fact with regard to him. The 
Universe makes no immediate objection to be conceived in 
any way ; pictures itself as plainly in the seeing faculty 
of Newton's Dog Diamond, as of Newton ; and yields to 



298 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

each a result accurately corresponding. To the Dog Diamond 
dogs'-meat, with its adjuncts, better or worse ; to Newton 
discovery of the System of the Stars. Not the Universe's 
affair at all ; but the seeing party's affair very much, for 
the results to each correspond, with exact proportion, to his 
notion of it. 

The saddest condition of human affairs, what ancient 
Prophets denounced as * the Throne of Iniquity, 1 where men 
' decree injustice by a law ' : all this, with its thousandfold 
outer miseries, is still but a symptom ; all this points to a far 
sadder disease which lies invisible within ! In new dialect, 
whatever modified interpretation we may put upon it, the 
same must be said as in old : ' God's judgments are abroad 
in the world ' ; and it would much behove many of us to 
know well that the essential fact lies there and not elsewhere. 
If we * sin against God, 1 it is most certain * God's judgments * 
will overtake us ; and whether we recognise them as God's 
message like men, or merely rage and writhe under them like 
dogs, and in our blind agony, each imputing it to his neigh- 
bour, tear one another in pieces under them, it is certain they 
will continue upon us, till we either cease * sinning,' or are all 
torn in pieces and annihilated. 

Wide-spread suffering, mutiny and delirium ; the hot rage 
of sansculottic Insurrections, the cold rage of resuscitated 
Tyrannies ; the brutal degradation of the millions, the 
pampered frivolity of the units ; that awful unheeded spec- 
tacle, * the Throne of Iniquity decreeing injustice by a law,* 
as the just eye can see it everywhere doing : certainly 
something must be wrong in the inner man of the world, 
since its outer man is so terribly out of square ! The 
deliverer of the world, therefore, were not he who headed 
sansculottic insurrections never so successful, but he who 
pointed out to the world what nightmares were resting over 
its soul. Ignatius Loyola, and the innumerable company, 
Papist, Protestant, Sham-christian, Anti-christian, that have 
believed his revelation ; universal prevalence, from pole to 



VIIL] JESUITISM 299 

pole, of such a c doctrine of devils ' ; reverent or quasi- 
reverent faith in the dead human formulas, and somnolent 
contempt of the divine ever-living facts, such as reigns now, 
consecrated and supreme, in all commonwealths and countries, 
and hearts of men ; the Human Species, as it were, uncon- 
sciously or consciously, gone all to one Sodality of Jesuitism : 
who will deliver us from the body of this death ! It is in 
truth like death-in-life; a living -criminal (as in the old 
Roman days) with a corpse lashed fast to him. What wretch 
could have deserved such a doom ? 

As to this Ignatius, I am aware he is admired, and even 
transcendently admired, or what we call worshipped, by multi- 
tudes of human creatures, who to this day expect, or endeavour 
to expect, some kind of salvation from him ; whom it is so 
painful to enrage against me, if I could avoid it ! Un- 
doubtedly Ignatius, centuries ago, gave satisfaction to the 
Devil's Advocate, the Pope and other parties interested ; was 
canonised, named Saint, and raised duly into Heaven officially 
so-called ; whereupon, with many, he passes, ever since, for 
a kind of God, or person who has much influence with the 
gods. Alas, the admiration, and transcendent admiration, of 
mankind, goes a strange road in these times ! Hudson too 
had his canonisation : and by Vox Populi, if not by Pope and 
Devil's Advocate, was raised to a kind of brass Olympus by 
mankind ; and rode there for a year or two ; though he is 
already gone to warming-pans again. A poor man, in our 
day, has many gods foisted on him ; and big voices bid him, 

" Worship, or be ! " in a menacing and confusing 

manner. What shall he do ? By far the greater part of 
said gods, current in the public, whether canonised by Pope 
or Populus, are mere dumb Apises and beatified Prize-oxen ; 
nay, some of them, who have articulate faculty, are devils 
instead of gods. A poor man that would save his soul alive 
is reduced to the sad necessity of sharply trying his gods 
whether they are divine or not ; which is a terrible pass for 



300 LATTER- DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

mankind, and lays an awful problem upon each man. The 
man must do it, however. At his own peril he will have to 
do this problem too, which is one of the awfulest ; and his 
neighbours, all but a most select portion of them, portion 
generally not clad in official tiaras, can be of next to no help 
to him in it, nay, rather will infinitely hinder him in it, as 
matters go. If Ignatius, worshipped by millions as a kind of 
god, is, in eternal fact, a kind of devil, or enemy of whatsoever 
is godlike in man's existence, surely it is pressingly expedient 
that men were made aware of it ; that men, with whatever 
earnestness is yet in them, laid it awfully to heart ! 

Prim friend with the black serge gown, with the rosary, 
scapulary, and I know not what other spiritual block-and- 
tackle, scowl not on me. If in thy poor heart, under its 
rosaries, there dwell any human piety, awestruck reverence 
towards the Supreme Maker, devout compassion towards this 
poor Earth and her sons, scowl not anathema on me, listen 
to me ; for I swear thou art my brother, in spite of rosaries 
and scapularies ; and I recognise thee, though thou canst not 
me ; and with love and pity know thee for a brother, though 
enchanted into the condition of a spiritual mummy. Hapless 
creature, curse me not ; listen to me, and consider ; perhaps 
even thou wilt escape from mummyhood, and become once 
more a living soul ! 

Of Ignatius, then, I must take leave to say, there can this 
be recorded, that probably he has done more mischief in the 
Earth than any man born since. A scandalous mortal, O 
brethren of mankind who live by truth and not by falsity, 
I must call this man. Altogether, here where I stand, look- 
ing on millions of poor pious brothers reduced to spiritual 
mummyhood, who curse me because I try to speak the truth 
to them, and on a whole world canting and grimacing from 
birth to death, and finding in their life two serious indubita- 
bilities, Cookery and Scrip, how, if he is the representative 
and chief fountain of all this, can I call him other than the 



VIIL] JESUITISM 301 

superlative of scandals ? A bad man, I think ; not good by 
nature ; and by destiny swollen into a very Ahriman of bad- 
ness. Not good by nature, I perceive. A man born greedy ; 
whose greatness in the beginning, and even in the end if we 
will look well, is indicated chiefly by the depth of his appe- 
tite : not the recommendable kind of man ! A man full of 
prurient elements from the first ; which at the last, through 
his long course, have developed themselves over the family of 
mankind into an expression altogether tremendous. 

A young Spanish soldier and hidalgo with hot Biscayan 
blood, distinguished, as I understand, by his fierce appetites 
chiefly, by his audacities and sensualities, and loud unreason- 
able decision, That this Universe, in spite of rumours to the 
contrary, was a Cookery-shop and Bordel, wherein garlic, 
Jamaica-pepper, unfortunate-females and other spicery and 
garnishing awaited the bold human appetite, and the rest of 
it was mere rumour and moonshine : with this life-theory and 
practice had Ignatius lived some thirty years, a hot human 
Papin's-digester and little other ; when, on the walls of Pam- 
peluna, the destined cannon-shot shattered both his legs, 
leaving his head, hitting only his legs, so the Destinies would 
have it, and he fell at once totally prostrate, a wrecked 
Papin's-digester ; lay many weeks horizontal, and had in that 
tedious posture to commence a new series of reflections. 
He began to perceive now that * the rest of it ' was not mere 
rumour and moonshine ; that the rest was, in fact, the whole 
secret of the matter. That the Cookery-shop and Bordel 
was a magical delusion, a sleight-of-hand of Satan, to lead 
Ignatius down, by garlic and finer temporal spiceries, to 
eternal Hell ; and that in short he, Ignatius, had lived 
hitherto as a degraded ferocious Human Pig, one of the most 
perfect scoundrels ; and was, at that date, no other than a 
blot on Creation, and a scandal to mankind. 

With which set of reflections who could quarrel ? The 
reflections were true, were salutary ; nay, there was something 
of sacred in them, as in the repentance of man, in the 



302 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

discovery by erring man that wrong is not right, that wrong 
differs from right as deep Hell from high Heaven, there ever 
is. Ignatius's soul was in convulsions, in agonies of new 
birth ; for which I honour Ignatius. Human sincerity could 
not but have told him : " Yes, in several respects, thou art a 
detestable Human Pig, and disgrace to the family of man ; 
for which it behoves thee to be in nameless remorse, till thy 
life either mend or end. Consider, there as thou liest with 
thy two legs smashed, the peccant element that is in thee ; 
discover it, rigorously tear it out ; reflect what farther thou 
wilt do. A life yet remains ; to be led, clearly, in some new 
manner : how wilt thou lead it ? Sit silent for the rest of 
thy days ? In some most modest seclusion, hide thyself from 
a humankind which has been dishonoured by thee ? Thy sin 
being pruriency of appetite, give that at least no farther 
scope under any old or new form ? " 

I admit, the question was not easy. Think, in this his 
wrecked horizontal position, what could or should the poor 
individual called Inigo, Ignatius, or whatever the first name 
of him was, have done? Truly for Ignatius the question 
was very complicated. But, had he asked from Nature and 
the eternal Oracles a remedy for wrecked sensualism, here 
surely was one thing that would have suggested itself : To 
annihilate his pruriency. To cower, silent and ashamed, into 
some dim corner ; and resolve to make henceforth as little 
noise as possible. That would have been modest, salutary ; 
that might have led to many other virtues, and gradually to 
all. That, I think, is what the small still voices would have 
told Ignatius, could he have heard them amid the loud bully- 
ings and liturgyings ; but he couldn't, perhaps he never 
tried ; and thai, accordingly, was not what Ignatius resolved 
upon. 

In fact, Christian doctrine, backed by all the human wisdom 
I could ever hear of, inclines me to think that Ignatius, had 
he been a good and brave man, should have consented, at 
this point, to be damned, as was clear to him that he 



VIIL] JESUITISM 303 

deserved to be. Here would have been a healing solace to 
his conscience ; one transcendent act of virtue which it still 
lay with him, the worst of sinners, to do. " To die forever, 
as I have deserved ; let Eternal Justice triumph so, by means 
of me and my foul scandals, since otherwise it may not ! " 
Selbsttodtung, Annihilation of Self, justly reckoned the begin- 
ning of all virtue : here is the highest form of it, still possible 
to the lowest man. The voice of Nature this, to a repentant 
outcast sinner turning again towards the realms of manhood ; 
and I understand it is the precept of all right Christianity 
too. But no, Ignatius could not, in his lowest abasement, 
consent to have justice done on him, not on him, ah no ; 
and there lay his crime and his misfortune, which has brought 
such penalty on him and us. 

The truth is, it was not of Eternal Nature and her Oracles 
that Ignatius inquired, poor man ; it was of Temporary Art 
and hers, and these sang not of self-annihilation, or Ignatius 
would not hear that part of their song. Not so did Ignatius 
read the omens. " My pruriency being terribly forbidden on 
one side, let it," thought Ignatius, deeply unconscious of such 
a thought, " have terrible course on another. Garlic-cookery 
and suchlike excitations are accursed to me forever ; but cannot 
I achieve something that shall still assert my Ego I in a 
highly gratifying manner ? " Alas, human sincerity, hard as 
his scourging had been, was not quite attainable by him. In 
his frantic just agonies, he flung himself before the shrine of 
Virgin Marys, Saints of the Romish Calendar, three-hatted 
Holy Fathers, and uncertain Thaumaturgic Entities ; praying 
that he might be healed by miracle, not by course of nature ; 
and that, for one most fatal item, his pruriency of appetite 
might, under new inverse forms, continue with him. Which 
prayer, we may say, was granted. 

In the depths of his despair, all Nature glooming veritable 
reprobation on him, and Eternal Justice whispering, "Accept 
what thou hast merited," there rose this altogether turbid 
semi-artificial glare of hope upon Ignatius, " The Virgin will 



304 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

save me, the Virgin has saved me ; * Well and good, I say ; 
then be quiet, and let us see some temperance and modesty in 
you. Far otherwise did Ignatius resolve : temperance and 
true modesty were not among the gifts of this precious 
individual the Virgin had been at the pains to save. Many 
plans Ignatius tried to make his Ego I still available on 
Earth, and still keep Heaven open for him. His pilgrimings 
and battlings, his silent sufferings and wrestlings for that object, 
are enormous, and reach the highest pitch of the prurient- 
heroic. At length, after various failures and unsatisfactory 
half-successes, it struck him : " Has not there lately been a 
sort of revolt against the Virgin, and the Holy Father who 
takes care of her ? Certain infernal Heresiarchs in Germany 
and elsewhere, I am told, have risen up against the Holy 
Father, arguing with terrible plausibility that he is an Unholy 
Phantasm : he ; and if so, what am I and my outlooks ! A 
new light, presumably of Hell, has risen to that effect ; 
which new light why cannot I vow here, and consecrate 
myself, to battle against, and with my whole strength en- 
deavour to extinguish?" That was the task Ignatius fixed 
upon as his ; and at that he has been busy, he and an im- 
mense and ever-increasing sodality of mortals, these three 
hundred years ; and, through various fortune, they have 
brought it thus far. Truly to one of the most singular pre- 
dicaments the affairs of mankind ever stood in before. 

If the new light is of Hell, O Ignatius, right : but if of 
Heaven, there is not, that I know of, any equally damnable 
sin as thine ! No ; thy late Pighood itself is trivial in com- 
parison. Frantic mortal, wilt thou, at the bidding of any 
Papa, war against Almighty God ? Is there no * inspiration,' 
then, but an ancient Jewish, Greekish, Romish one, with big 
revenues, loud liturgies and red stockings ? The Pope is old ; 
but Eternity, thou shalt observe, is older. High-treason 
against all the Universe is dangerous to do. Quench not 
among us, I advise thee, the monitions of that thrice-sacred 
gospel, holier than all gospels, which dwells in each man 



VIIL] JESUITISM 305 

direct from the Maker of him ! Frightfully will it be 
avenged on thee, and on all that follow thee ; to the sixth 
generation and farther, all men shall lie under this gigantic 
Upas-tree thou hast been planting ; terribly will the gods 
avenge it on thee, and on all thy Father Adam's house ! 



Ignatius's black militia, armed with this precious message 
of salvation, have now been campaigning over all the world 
for about three hundred years ; and openly or secretly have 
done a mighty work over all the world. Who can count 
what a work ! Where you meet a man believing in the 
salutary nature of falsehoods, or the divine authority of things 
doubtful, and fancying that to serve the Good Cause he must 
call the Devil to his aid, there is a follower of Unsaint 
Ignatius ; not till the last of these men has vanished from 
the Earth will our account with Ignatius be quite settled, and 
his black militia have got their mittimus to Chaos again. 
They have given a new substantive to modern languages. 
The word ' Jesuitism ' now, in all countries, expresses an idea 
for which there was in Nature no prototype before. Not till 
these late centuries had the human soul generated that 
abomination, or needed to name it. Truly they have achieved 
great things in the world ; and a general result which we 
may call stupendous. Not victory for Ignatius and the black 
militia, no, till the Universe itself become a cunningly 
devised Fable, and God the Maker abdicate in favour of 
Beelzebub, I do not see how * victory ' can fall on that side ! 
But they have done such deadly execution on the general 
soul of man ; and have wrought such havoq, on the terrestrial 
and supernal interests of this world, as insure to Jesuitism 
a long memory in human annals. 

How many three-hatted Papas, and scandalous Consecrated 
Phantasms, cleric and laic, convicted or not yet suspected to 
be Phantasms and servants of the Devil and not of God, does 

u 



306 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

it still retain in existence in all corners of this afflicted world ! 
Germany had its War of Thirty Years, among other wars, on 
this subject ; and had there not been elsewhere a nobler 
loyalty to God's Cause than was to be found in Germany at 
that date, Ignatius with his rosaries and gibbet-ropes, with 
his honey-mouthed Fathers Lammerlein in black serge, and 
heavyfisted Fathers Wallenstein in chain armour, must have 
carried it ; and that alarming Lutheran new-light would have 
been got extinguished again. The Continent once well 
quenched out, it was calculated England might soon be made 
to follow, and then the whole world were blessed with 
orthodoxy. So it had been computed. But Gustavus, a 
man prepared to die if needful, Gustavus with his Swedes 
appeared upon the scene ; nay, shortly Oliver Cromwell with 
his Puritans appeared upon it ; and the computation quite 
broke down. Beyond seas and within seas, the Wallensteins 
and Lammerleins, the Hyacinths and Andreas Habernfelds, 
the Lauds and Charleses, in fine, Ignatius and all that held 
of him, had to cower into their holes again, and try it by 
new methods. Many were their methods, their fortune 
various ; and ever and anon, to the hope or the terror of this 
and the other man of weak judgment, it has seemed that 
victory was just about to crown Ignatius. True, too true, 
the execution done upon the soul of mankind has been 
normous and tremendous ; but victory to Ignatius there has 
been none, and will and can be none. 

Nay, at last, ever since 1789 and '93, the figure of the 
quarrel has much altered ; and the hope for Ignatius (except 
to here and there a man of weak judgment) has become a 
flat impossibility. For Luther and Protestantism Proper 
having, so to speak, withdrawn from the battlefield, as 
entities whose work was done, there then appeared on it Jean 
Jacques and French Sansculottism ; to which all creatures 
have gradually joined themselves. Whereby now we have 
Protestantism /mproper, a Protestantism universal and 
illimitable on the part of all men ; the whole world risen 



Vlll.] JESUITISM 307 

into anarchic mutiny, with pike and paving-stone; swearing 
by Heaven above and also by Hell beneath, by the Eternal 
Yea and the Eternal No, that Ignatius and Imposture shall 
not rule them any more, neither in soul nor in body nor in 
breeches-pocket any more ; but that they will go unruled 
rather, as they hope it will be possible for them to do. 
This is Ignatius's * destruction ' of Protestantism : he has 
destroyed it into Sansculottism, such a form of all-embracing 
Protestantism as was never dreamt of by the human soul 
before. So that now, at last, there is hope of final death 
and rest to Ignatius and his labours. Ignatius, I perceive, 
is now sure to die, and be abolished before long ; nay, is 
already dead, and will not even galvanise much farther ; but, 
in fine, is hourly sinking towards the Abyss, dragging much 
along with him thither. Whole worlds along with him : 
such continents of things, once living and beautiful, now dead 
and horrible ; things once sacred, now not even commonly 
profane : fearful and wonderful, to every thinking heart and 
seeing eye, in these days ! That is the answer, slowly 
enunciated, but irrevocable and indubitable, which Ignatius 
gets in Heaven's High Court, when he appeals there, asking, 
" Am I a Sanctus or not, as the Papa and his Devil's- Advocate 
told me I was ? " 

The * vivaciousness ' of Jesuitism is much spoken of, as a 
thing creditable. And truly it is remarkable, though I 
think in the way of wonder even more than of admiration, 
what a quantity of killing it does require. To say nothing 
of the Cromwells and Gustavuses, and what they did, they 
and theirs, it is near a century now since Pombal and 
Aranda, secular and not divine men, yet useful antiseptic 
products of their generation, felt called, if not consciously 
by Heaven, then by Earth which is unconsciously a bit of 
Heaven, to cut-down this scandal from the world, and make 
the earth rid of Jesuitism for one thing. What a wide- 
sweeping shear they gave it, as with the sudden scythe of 



308 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

universal death, is well known ; and how, mown down from 
side to side of the world in one day, it had to lie sorrowfully 
slain and withering under the sun. After all which, nay, 
after 1793 itself, does not Jesuitism still pretend to be 
alive, and in this year 1850, still (by dint of steady 
galvanism) shows some quivering in its fingers and toes ? 
Vivacious, sure enough ; and I suppose there must be reasons 
for it, which it is well to note withal. But what if such 
vivaciousness were, in good part, like that of evil weeds ; if 
the ' strength ' of Jesuitism were like that of typhus-fever, 
not a recommendable kind of strength ! 

I hear much also of ' obedience, 1 how that and the kindred 
virtues are prescribed and exemplified by Jesuitism ; the truth 
of which, and the merit of which, far be it from me to deny. 
Obedience, a virtue universally forgotten in these days, will 
have to become universally known again. Obedience is good, 
and indispensable : but if it be obedience to what is wrong 
and false, good Heavens, there is no name for such a depth 
of human cowardice and calamity ; spurned everlastingly by 
the gods. Loyalty ? Will you be loyal to Beelzebub ? 
Will you * make a covenant with Death and Hell ' ? I will 
not be loyal to Beelzebub ; I will become a nomadic Chactaw 
rather, a barricading Sansculotte, a Conciliation-Hall repealer ; 
anything and everything is venial to that. 

The virtues of Jesuitism, seasoned with that fatal condiment, 
are other than quite virtuous ! To cherish pious thoughts, 
and assiduously keep your eye directed to a Heaven that is 
not real : will that yield divine life to you, or hideous galvanic 
life-in-death ? To cherish many quasi-human virtues, really 
many possibilities of virtue ; and wed them all to the 
principle that God can be served by believing what is not 
true : to put-out the sacred lamp of Intellect within you ; to 
decide on maiming yourself of that higher godlike gift, which 
God himself has given you with a silent but awful charge 
in regard to it ; to be bullied and bowowed out of your 
loyalty to the God of Light by big Phantasms and three- 



viii.] JESUITISM 309 

hatted Chimeras : can I call that by the name of nobleness 
or human courage ? " Could not help it," say you ? If * a 
man cannot help it," a man must allow me to say he has 
unfortunately given the most conspicuous proof of caitiffhood 
that lay within his human possibility, and he must cease to 
brag to me about his * virtues,' in that sad case ! 

But, in fact, the character of the poor creature named 
Ignatius, whether it be good or bad and worst, concerns us 
little ; not even that of the specific Jesuit Body concerns us 
much. The Jesuits proper have long since got their final 
mittimus from England. Nor, in the seventeenth century, 
with an ubiquitous alarming Toby Mathews, Andreas 
Habernfeld and Company ; with there a Father Hyacinth, 
and here a William Laud and Charles First, was this by 
any means so light a business as we now fancy. But it has 
been got accomplished. Long now have the English People 
understood that Jesuits proper, in so far as they are not 
Nothing (which is the commonest case), are servants of the 
Prince of Darkness : by Puritan Cromwelliads on the great 
scale, and on the small by diligent hunting, confinement in 
the Clink Prison, and judicial tribulation, let us say, by 
earnest pious thought and fight, and the labours of the valiant 
born to us, this country has been tolerably cleared of 
Jesuits proper ; nor is there danger of their ever coming to 
a head here again. But, alas, the expulsion of the Jesuit 
Body avails us little, when the Jesuit Soul has so nestled 
itself in the life of mankind everywhere. What we have to 
complain of is, that all men are become Jesuits ! That no 
man speaks the truth to you or to himself, but that every 
man lies, with blasphemous audacity, and does not know 
that he is lying, before God and man, in regard to almost 
all manner of things. This is the fell heritage bequeathed 
us by Ignatius ; to this sad stage has our battle with him 
come. 

Consider it, good reader ; and yet alas, if thou be not one 



310 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

of a thousand, what is the use of bidding thee consider it ! 
The deadliest essence of the curse we now labour under is 
that the light of our inner eyesight is gone out ; that such 
things are not discernible by considering. ' Cant and even 
sincere Cant ' : O Heaven, when a man doing his sincerest is 
still but canting ! For this is the sad condition of the 
insincere man : he is doomed all his days to deal with insin- 
cerities ; to live, move, and have his being in traditions and 
conventionalities. If the traditions have grown old, the 
conventionalities will be mostly false ; true in no sense can 
they be for him : never shall he behold the truth of any 
matter ; formulas, theologic, economic and other, certain 
superficial readings of truth, required in the market-place, 
these he will take with him, these he will apply dextrously, 
and with these he will have to satisfy himself. Sincerity shall 
not exist for him ; he shall think that he has found it, while 
it is yet far away. The deep, awful and indeed divine quality 
of truth that lies in every object, and in virtue of which the 
object exists, from his poor eyes this is forever hidden. 
Not with austere divine realities which belong to the Universe 
and to Eternity, but with paltry ambiguous phantasms, 
comfortable and uncomfortable, which belong to his own 
parish, and to the current week or generation, shall he pass 
his days. 

There had been liars in the world ; alas, never since the 
Old Serpent tempted Eve, had the world been free of liars, 
neither will it be : but there was in this of Jesuit Ignatius an 
apotheosis of falsity, a kind of subtle quintessence and deadly 
virus of lying, the like of which had never been seen before. 
Measure it, if you can ; prussic-acid and chloroform are poor 
to it ! Men had served the Devil, and men had very imper- 
fectly served God ; but to think that God could be served 
more perfectly by taking the Devil into partnership, this 
was a novelty of St. Ignatius. And this is now no novelty ; 
to such extent has the Jesuit chloroform stupefied us all. 
This is the universal faith and practice, for several genera- 



viii.] JESUITISM 311 

tions past, of the class called good men in this world. They 
are in general mutineers, sansculottes, angry disorderly persons, 
and a class rather worthy to be called bad, who hitherto 
assert the contrary of this. " Be careful how you believe 
truth," cries the good man everywhere : " Composure and a 
whole skin are very valuable. Truth, who knows ? many 
things are not true ; most things are uncertainties, very 
prosperous things are even open falsities that have been 
agreed upon. There is little certain truth going. If it isn't 
orthodox truth, it will play the very devil with you ! " 

Did the Human Species ever lie in such a soak of horrors, 
sunk like steeping flax under the wide-spread fetid Hell- 
waters, in all spiritual respects dead, dead ; voiceless towards 
Heaven for centuries back ; merely sending up, in the form 
of mute prayer, such an odour as the angels never smelt 
before ! It has to lie there, till the worthless part has been 
rotted out ; till much has been rotted out, I do perceive ; 
and perhaps the time has come when the precious lintjibre 
itself is in danger ; and men, if they are not delivered, will 
cease to be men, or to be at all ! O Heavens, with divine 
Hudson on this hand, and divine Ignatius on that, and the 
Gorham Controversy going on, and the Irish Tenant Agita- 
tion (which will soon become a Scotch and an English ditto) 
just about beginning, is not the hour now nearly come ? 
Words fail us when we would speak of what Ignatius has 
done for men. Probably the most virulent form of sin which 
the Old Serpent has yet rejoiced in on our poor Earth. For 
me it is the deadliest high treason against God our Maker 
which the soul of man could commit. 

And this, then, is the horrible conclusion we have arrived 
at, in England as in all countries ; and with less protest 
against it hitherto, and not with more, in England than in 
other countries ? That the great body of orderly considerate 
men ; men affecting the name of good and pious, and who, 
in fact, excluding certain silent exceptionary individuals one to 
the million, such as the Almighty Beneficence never quite 



312 LATTER- DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

withholds, are accounted our best men, have unconsciously 
abnegated the sacred privilege and duty of acting or speaking 
the truth ; and fancy that it is not truth that is to be acted, 
but that an amalgam of truth and falsity is the safe thing. 
In parliament and pulpit, in book and speech, in whatever 
spiritual thing men have to commune of, or to do together, 
this is the rule they have lapsed into, this is the pass they 
have arrived at. We have to report that Human Speech is 
not true ! That it is false to a degree never witnessed in this 
world till lately. Such a subtle virus of falsity in the very 
essence of it, as far excels all open lying, or prior kinds of 
falsity ; false with consciousness of being sincere ! The heart 
of the world is corrupted to the core; a detestable devilV 
poison circulates in the life-blood of mankind ; taints with 
abominable deadly malady all that mankind do. Such a 
curse never fell on men before. 

For the falsity of speech rests on a far deeper falsity. 
False speech, as is inevitable when men long practise it, falsi- 
fies all things ; the very thoughts, or fountains of speech and 
action become false. Ere long, by the appointed curse of 
Heaven, a man's intellect ceases to be capable of distinguish- 
ing truth, when he permits himself to deal in speaking or 
acting what is false. Watch well the tongue, for out of it 
are the issues of life ! O, the foul leprosy that heaps itself 
in monstrous accumulation over Human Life, and obliterates 
all the divine features of it into one hideous mountain of 
purulent disease, when Human Life parts company with truth; 
and fancies, taught by Ignatius or another, that lies will be 
the salvation of it ! We of these late centuries have suffered 
as the sons of Adam never did before ; hebetated, sunk under 
mountains of torpid leprosy ; and studying to persuade our- 
selves that this is health. 

And if we have awakened from the sleep of death into the 
Sorcerer's Sabbath of Anarchy, is it not the chief of blessings 
that we are awake at all ? Thanks to Transcendent Sanscu- 
lottism and the long-memorable French Revolution, the one 



vm.] JESUITISM 313 

veritable and tremendous Gospel of these bad ages, divine 
Gospel such as we deserved, and merciful too, though preached 
in thunder and terror ! Napoleon Campaignings, September 
Massacres, Reigns of Terror, Anacharsis Clootz and Pontiff 
Robespierre, and still more beggarly tragicalities that we have 
since seen, and are still to see : what frightful thing were not 
a little less frightful than the thing we had ? Peremptory 
was our necessity of putting Jesuitism away, of awakening to 
the consciousness of Jesuitism. * Horrible,' yes : how could 
it be other than horrible ? Like the valley of Jehoshaphat, 
it lies round us, one nightmare wilderness, and wreck of dead- 
men's bones, this false modern world ; and no rapt Ezekiel in 
prophetic vision imaged to himself things sadder, more horrible 
and terrible, than the eyes of men, if they are awake, may 
now deliberately see. Many yet sleep ; but the sleep of all, 
as we judge by their maundering and jargoning, their Gorham 
Controversies, street-barricadings, and uneasy tossings and 
somnambulisms, is not far from ending. Novalis says, * We 
are near awakening when we dream that we are dreaming.'' 



A man's * religion ' consists not of the many things he is in 
doubt of and tries to believe, but of the few he is assured of, 
and has no need of effort for believing. His religion, what- 
ever it may be, is a discerned fact, and coherent system of 
discerned facts to him ; he stands fronting the worlds and the 
eternities upon it : to doubt of it is not permissible at all ! He 
must verify or expel his doubts, convert them into certainty 
of Yes or No ; or they will be the death of his religion. But, 
on the other hand, convert them into certainty of Yes and No; 
or even of Yes though No, as the Ignatian method is, what 
will become of your religion ? Let us glance a little at this 
strange aspect of our affairs. 

What a man's or nation's available religion at any time is, 



314 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

may sometimes, especially if he abound in Bishops, Gorham 
Controversies, and richly endowed Churches and Church-prac- 
tices, be difficult to say. For a Nation which, under very 
peculiar circumstances, closed its Bible about two hundred 
years ago, hanged the dead body of its Cromwell, and accepted 
one Charles Second for Defender of its Faith so-called ; for 
such a Nation, which has closed its Bible, and decided that 
the sufficient and much handier practice would be to kiss the 
outside of said Bible, and in all senses swear zealously, by 
the same without opening it again, the question what its 
' religion ' is, may naturally be involved in obscurities ! Such 
dramaturgic fugle- worship going on everywhere, and kissing 
of the closed Bible, what real worship religion, or recog- 
nition of a Divine Necessity in Nature and Life, there may 
be Or, in fact, is there any left at all ? Very little, I 
should say. 

The religion of a man in these strange circumstances, what 
living conviction he has about his Destiny in this Universe, 
falls into a most strange condition ; and, in truth, I have 
observed, is apt to take refuge in the stomach mainly. The 
man goes through his prescribed fugle-motions at church and 
elsewhere, keeping his conscience and sense of decency at ease 
thereby; and in some empty part of his brain, if he have 
fancy left, or brain other than a beaver's, there goes on 
occasionally some dance of dreamy hypotheses, sentimental 
echoes, shadows, and other inane make-believes, which I 
think are quite the contrary of a possession to him ; leading 
to no clear Faith, or divine life-and-death Certainty of any 
kind ; but to a torpid species of delirium somniam and 
delirium stertens rather. In his head or in his heart this 
man has of available religion none. But descend into his 
stomach, puree and the adjacent regions, you then do awaken, 
even in the very last extremity, a set of divine beliefs, were 
it only belief in the multiplication-table, and certain coarser 
outward forms of meum and tuum. He believes in the 
inalienable nature of purchased beef, in the duty of the 



VIIL] JESUITISM 315 

British citizen to fight for himself when injured, and other 
similar faiths : an actual ' religion ' of its sort, or revelation 
of what the Almighty Maker means with him in this Earth, 
and has irrefragably, as by direct inspiration, charged him 
to do. This is the man's religion ; this poor scantling of 
' divine convictions ' which you find lying, mostly inarticulate, 
in deep sleep at the bottom of his stomach, and have such 
difficulty in raising into any kind of elocution or conscious 
wakefulness. 

Alas, so much of him, his soul almost wholly, is not only 
asleep there, but gone drowned and dead. The ' religion ' you 
awaken in him is often of a very singular quality ; enough to 
make the observer pause in silence. Such a religion, issuing 
practically in Hudson Statues, and, alas, also in Distressed 
Needlewomen, Cannibal Connaughts, and ' remedial measures 
suited to the occasion,' was never seen among Adam's Pos- 
terity before. But it is this modern man's religion ; all the 
religion you will get of him. And if you can winnow-out 
the fugle-motions, fantasies, sentimentalisms, make-believes, 
and other multitudinous chaff, so that his religion stands 
before you in its net condition, you may contemplate it with 
scientific astonishment, with innumerable reflections, and may 
perhaps draw wise inferences from it. 

A singular piece of scribble, in Sauerteig's hand, bearing 
marks of haste and almost of rage (for the words, abbreviated 
to the bone, tumble about as if in battle on the paper), occurs 
to me at this moment, entitled Schweirfsche Weltansicht ; and 
I will try to decipher and translate it. 

' Pig- Philosophy 

'If the inestimable talent of Literature should, in these 
swift days of progress, be extended to the brute creation, 
having fairly taken-in all the human, so that swine and oxen 
could communicate to us on paper what they thought of the 
Universe, there might curious results, not uninstructive to 



316 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

some of us, ensue. Supposing swine (I mean fourfooted 
swine), of sensibility and superior logical parts, had attained 
such culture ; and could, after survey and reflection, jot-down 
for us their notion of the Universe, and of their interests and 
duties there, might it not well interest a discerning public, 
perhaps in unexpected ways, and give a stimulus to the 
languishing book-trade? The votes of all creatures, it is 
understood at present, ought to be had ; that you may 
" legislate " for them with better insight. " How can you 
govern a thing,"" say many, " without first asking its vote ? " 
Unless, indeed, you already chance to know its vote, and 
even something more, namely, what you are to think of its 
vote ; what it wants by its vote ; and still more important, 
what Nature wants, which latter, at the end of the account, 

is the only thing that will be got ! Pig Propositions, in 

a rough form, are somewhat as follows : 

* 1. The Universe, so far as sane conjecture can go, is an 
immeasurable SwineVtrough, consisting of solid and liquid, 
and of other contrasts and kinds; especially consisting of 
attainable and unattainable, the latter in immensely greater 
quantities for most pigs. 

* 2. Moral evil is unattainability of Pig's -wash; moral 
good, attainability of ditto. 

*3. "What is Paradise, or the State of Innocence?" 
Paradise, called also State of Innocence, Age of Gold, and 
other names, was (according to Pigs of weak judgment) 
unlimited attainability of PigVwash ; perfect fulfilment of 
one's wishes, so that the Pig's imagination could not outrun 
reality : a fable and an impossibility, as Pigs of sense 
now see. 

* 4. " Define the Whole Duty of Pigs.** It is the mission 
of universal Pighood, and the duty of all Pigs, at all times, 
to diminish the quantity of unattainable and increase that 
of attainable. All knowledge and device and effort ought 
to be directed thither and thither only; Pig Science, Pig 



VIIL] JESUITISM 317 

Enthusiasm and Devotion have this one aim. It is the 
Whole Duty of Pigs. 

* 5. Pig Poetry ought to consist of universal recognition 
of the excellence of PigVwash and ground barley, and the 
felicity of Pigs whose trough is in order, and who have had 
enough : Hrumph ! 

' 6. The Pig knows the weather ; he ought to look out 
what kind of weather it will be. 

4 7. " Who made the Pig ? " Unknown ; perhaps the 
Pork-butcher ? 

4 8. " Have you Law and Justice in Pigdom ? " Pigs of 
observation have discerned that there is, or was once supposed 
to be, a thing called justice. Undeniably at least there is 
a sentiment in Pig-nature called indignation, revenge, etc., 
which, if one Pig provoke another, comes out in a more or 
less destructive manner : hence laws are necessary, amazing 
quantities of laws. For quarrelling is attended with loss of 
blood, of life, at any rate with frightful effusion of the general 
stock of Hog's -wash, and ruin (temporary ruin) to large 
sections of the universal Swine's- trough : wherefore let justice 
be observed, that so quarrelling be avoided. 

* 9. " What is justice ? " Your own share of the general 
Swine's-trough, not any portion of my share. 

* 10. " But what is * my ' share ? " Ah ! there in fact lies 
the grand difficulty ; upon which Pig science, meditating this 
long while, can settle absolutely nothing. My share hrumph ! 
my share is, on the whole, whatever I can contrive to 
get without being hanged or sent to the hulks. For there 
are gibbets, treadmills, I need not tell you, and rules which 
Lawyers have prescribed. 

'.11. "Who are Lawyers?" Servants of God, appointed 
revealers of the oracles of God, who read-off to us from day 
to day what is the eternal Commandment of God in reference 
to the mutual claims of his creatures in this world. 

* 12. "Where do they find that written ?" In Coke upon 
Lyttelton. 



818 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

'18. "Who made Coke?" Unknown: the maker of 
Coke's wig is discoverable. " What became of Coke ? w 
Died. " And then ? " Went to the undertaker ; went to 

the ' But we must pull up : Sauerteig's fierce humour, 

confounding ever farther in his haste the fourfooted with the 
twofooted animal, rushes into wilder and wilder forms of 
satirical torch-dancing, and threatens to end in a universal 
Rape of the Wigs, which in a person of his character looks 
ominous and dangerous. Here, for example, is his fifty-first 
* Proposition," 1 as he calls it : 

51. " What are Bishops ? " Overseers of souls. " What 
is a soul ? " The thing that keeps the body alive. " How 
do they oversee that?" They tie on a kind of aprons, 
publish charges ; I believe they pray dreadfully ; macerate 
themselves nearly dead with continual grief that they cannot 
in the least oversee it. "And are much honoured?" By 
the wise very much. 

52. " Define the Church." I had rather not. " Do you 
believe in a Future state ? " Yes, surely. " What is it ? " 
Heaven, so-called. " To everybody ? " I understand so ; 
hope so ! " What is it thought to be ? " Hrumph ! " No 
Hell, then, at all ? "Hrumph ! ' 



The Fine Arts are by some thought to be a kind of 
religion ; the chief religion this poor Europe is to have in 
time coming : and undoubtedly it is in Literature, Poetry 
and the other kindred Arts, where at least a certain manli- 
ness of temper, and liberty to follow truth, prevails or might 
prevail, that the world's chosen souls do now chiefly take 
refuge, and attempt what * Worship of the Beautiful ' may 
still be possible for them. The Poet in the Fine Arts, 
especially the Poet in Speech, what Fichte calls the ' Scholar ' 
or the * Literary Man, 1 is defined by Fichte as the ' Priest ' of 
these Modern Epochs, all the Priest they have. And 



VIIL] JESUITISM 319 

indeed Nature herself will teach us that the man born with 
what we call * genius,' which will mean, born with better and 
larger understanding than others ; the man in whom * the 
inspiration of the Almighty,' given to all men, has a higher 
potentiality; that he, and properly he only, is the per- 
petual Priest of Men ; ordained to the office by God himself, 
whether men can be so lucky as to get him ordained to it or 
not : nay, he does the office, too, after a sort, in this and in 
all epochs. Ever must the Fine Arts be if not religion, yet 
indissolubly united to it, dependent on it, vitally blended with 
it as body is with soul. 

Why should I say, Ignatius Loyola ruined our Fine Arts ? 
Ignatius thought not of the Fine Arts ; nor is the guilt all 
his. Ignatius, intent on the heart of the matter, did but 
consecrate in the name of Heaven, and religiously welcome as 
life in God, the universal death in the Devil which of itself 
was preparing to come, on the Fine Arts as on all things. 
The Fine Arts are not what I most regret in the catastrophe 
so frightfully accelerated and consummated by him ! If men's 
practical faith have become a Pig Philosophy, and their divine 
worship have become a Mumbojumboism, soliciting in dumb 
agony either change to the very heart or else extinction and 
abolition, it matters little what their fine or other arts may 
be. All arts, industries and pursuits they have, are tainted 
to the heart with foul poison ; carry not in them the inspir- 
ation of God, but (frightful to think of !) that of the Devil 
calling and thinking himself God ; and are smitten with a 
curse forevermore. What judgment the Academy of Cogno- 
scenti may pronounce on them, is unimportant to me ; what 
splendour of upholstery and French cookery, and temporary 
bullion at the Bank, may be realised from them, is important 
to M'Croudy, not to me. 

Such bullion, I perceive well, can but be temporary ; and 
if it were to be eternal, would bullion reconcile me to them ? 
No, M'Croudy, never. Bullion, temporary bullion itself, 
awakens the hallelujah of flunkies ; but even eternal bullion 



320 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

ought to make small impression upon men. To men I count 
it a human blessedness, and stern benignity of Heaven, that 
when their course is false and ignoble, their bullion begins to 
leave them ; that ultimate bankruptcy, and flat universal ruin, 
published in the gazette, and palpable even to flunkies, follows 
step by step, at a longer or shorter interval, all solecisms 
under this sun. Certain as shadow follows substance ; it is 
the oldest law of Fate : and one good day, open ruin, bank- 
ruptcy and foul destruction, does overtake them all. Let 
us bless God for it. Were it otherwise, what end could there 
be of solecisms ? The temporary paradise of quacks and 
flunkies were now an eternal paradise ; how could the noble 
soul find harbour or patience in this world at all ? This 
world were the inheritance of the ignoble ; a very Bedlam, 
as some sceptics have fancied it ; made by malignant gods in 
their sport. 

But as to Jesuitism in the Fine Arts, and how its unsus- 
pected thrice-unblessed presence here too smites the genius of 
mankind with paralysis, there were much to be said. Sorrow- 
ful reflections lie in that, far beyond what a discerning 
public fancies in these days; reflections which cannot be 
entered upon, which can hardly be indicated afar off, at 
present. Here too, as elsewhere, the consummate flower of 
Consecrated Unveracity reigns supreme ; and here as else- 
where peaceably presides over an enormous Life-in-Death ! 

** May the Devil fly away with the Fine Arts ! w exclaimed 
confidentially once, in my hearing, one of our most distin- 
guished public men ; a sentiment that often recurs to me. I 
perceive too well how true it is, in our case. A public man, 
intent on any real business, does, I suppose, find the Fine 
Arts rather imaginary. The Fine Arts, wherever they turn- 
up as business, whatever Committee sit upon them, are sure 
to be the parent of much empty talk, laborious hypocrisy, 
dilettantism, futility; involving huge trouble and expense 
and babble, which end in no result, if not in worse than none. 



viii.] JESUITISM 321 

The practical man, in his moments of sincerity, feels them to 
be a pretentious nothingness ; a confused superfluity and 
nuisance, purchased with cost, what he in brief language 
denominates a bore. It is truly so, in these degraded days : 
and the Fine Arts, among other fine interests of ours, are 
really called to recognise it, and see what they will do in it. 
For they are become the Throne of Hypocrisy, I think the 
highest of her many thrones, these said Arts ; which is very 
sad to consider ! Nowhere, not even on a gala-day in the 
Pope's Church of St. Peter, is there such an explosion of in- 
tolerable hypocrisy, on the part of poor mankind, as when you 
admit them into their Royal Picture-gallery, Glyptothek, 
Museum, or other divine Temple of the Fine Arts. Hypocrisy 
doubly intolerable ; because it is not here, as in St. Peter's 
and some other Churches, an obliged hypocrisy but a voluntary 
one. Nothing but your own vanity prompts you here to 
pretend worshipping ; you are not bound to worship, and 
twaddle pretended raptures, criticisms and poetic recognitions, 
unless you like it ; and you do not the least know what a 
damnable practice it is, or you wouldn't ! I make a rule, 
these many years back, to speak almost nothing, and en- 
courage no speech in Picture-galleries ; to avoid company, 
even that of familiar friends, in such situations ; and per- 
ambulate the place in silence. You can thus worship or not 
worship, precisely as the gods bid you ; and are at least under 
no obligation to do hypocrisies, if you cannot conveniently 
worship. 

The fact is, though men are not in the least aware of it, 
the Fine Arts, divorced entirely from Truth this long while, 
and wedded almost professedly to Falsehood, Fiction and 
suchlike, are got into what we must call an insane condition : 
they walk abroad without keepers, nobody suspecting their 
sad state, and do fantastic tricks equal to any in Bedlam, 
especially when admitted to work ' regardless of expense,' 
as we sometimes see them ! What earnest soul passes that 
new St. Stephen's, and its wilderness of stone pepperboxes 

x 



322 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

with their tin flags atop, worth two millions I am told, 
without mentally exclaiming Apagv, and cutting some pious 
cross in the air ! If that be * ideal beauty, 1 except for 
sugarwork, and the more elaborate kinds of gingerbread, 
what is real ugliness ? To say merely (with an architectonic 
trumpet-blast that cost two-millions), " Good Christians, you 
observe well I am regardless of expense, and also of veracity, 
in every form ? " Too truly these poor Fine Arts have 
fallen mad ! 

The Fine Arts once divorcing themselves from truth, are 
quite certain to fall mad, if they do not die, and get flown 
away with by the Devil, which latter is only the second-worst 
result for us. Truth, fact, is the life of all things ; falsity, 
* fiction ' or whatever it may call itself, is certain to be death, 
and is already insanity, to whatever thing takes up with it. 
Fiction, even to the Fine Arts, is not a quite permissible 
thing. Sparingly permissible, within iron limits ; or if you 
will reckon strictly, not permissible at all ! The Fine Arts 
too, like the coarse and every art of Man's god -given Faculty, 
are to understand that they are sent hither not to fib and 
dance, but to speak and work ; and, on the whole, that God 
Almighty's Facts, such as given us, are the one pabulum 
which will yield them any nourishment in this world. O 
Heavens, had they always well remembered that, what a world 
were it now ! 

This seems strange doctrine : but it is to me, this long 
while, too sorrowfully certain ; and I invite all my artist 
friends, of the painting, sculpturing, speaking, writing, 
especially of the singing and rhyming department, to medi- 
tate upon it, till, with amazement, remorse, and determination 
to amend, they get to see what lies in it ! Homer's Iliad, if 
you examine, is no Fiction but a Ballad History ; the heart 
of it burning with enthusiastic ill-informed belief. It * sings ' 
itself, because its rude heart, rapt into transcendency of 
zeal and admiration, is too full for speaking. The * valour 
of Tydides,' ' wrath of the divine Achilles' : in old Greece, 



VIII.] JESUITISM 323 

in Phthiotis and JStolia, to earnest souls that could believe 
them, these things were likely to be interesting ! Human 
speech was once wholly true ; as transcendent human speech 
still is. The Hebrew Bible, is it not, before all things, true, 
as no other Book ever was or will be ? All great Poems, all 
great Books, if you search the first foundation of their 
greatness, have been veridical, the truest they could get to be. 
Never will there be a great Poem more that is not veridical, 
that does not ground itself on the Interpreting of Fact ; to 
the rigorous exclusion of all falsity, fiction, idle dross of 
every kind : never can a Poem truly interest human souls, 
except by, in the first place, taking with it the belief of said 
souls. Their belief ; that is the whole basis, essence, and 
practical outcome, of human souls : leave that behind you, as 
' Poets ' everywhere have for a long time done, what is there 
left the Poets and you ! 

The early Nations of the world, all Nations so long as 
they continued simple and in earnest, knew without teaching 
that their History was an Epic and Bible, the clouded 
struggling Image of a God's Presence, the action of heroes 
and god-inspired men. The noble intellect that could dis- 
enthral such divine image, and present it to them clear, un- 
clouded, in visible coherency comprehensible to human thought, 
was felt to be a Votes and the chief of intellects. No need 
to bid him sing it, make a Poem of it. Nature herself com- 
pelled him ; except in Song or in Psalm, such an insight by 
human eyes into the divine was not utterable. These are 
the Bibles of Nations ; to each its Believed History is its 
Bible. Not in Judea alone, or Hellas and Latium alone ; 
but in all lands and all times. Nor, deeply as the fact is 
now forgotten, has it essentially in the smallest degree ceased 
to be the fact, nor will it cease. With every Nation it is 
so, and with every man ; for every Nation, I suppose, was 
made by God, and every man too ? Only there are some 
Nations, like some men, who know it ; and some who do not, 



324 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

The great Nations are they that have known it well ; the 
small and contemptible, both of men and Nations, are they 
that have either never known it, or soon forgotten it and 
never laid it to heart. Of these comes nothing. The 
measure of a Nation's greatness, of its worth under this sky 
to God and to men, is not the quantity of cotton it can spin, 
the quantity of bullion it has realised ; but the quantity of 
heroisms it has achieved, of noble pieties and valiant wisdoms 
that were in it, that still are in it. 

Beyond doubt the Almighty Maker made this England 
too ; and has been and forever is miraculously present here. 
The more is the pity for us if our eyes are grown owlish, and 
cannot see this fact of facts when it is before us ! Once it 
was known that the Highest did of a surety dwell in this 
Nation, divinely avenging, and divinely saving and rewarding ; 
leading, by steep and flaming paths, by heroisms, pieties 
and noble acts and thoughts, this Nation heavenward, if it 
would and dared. Known or not, this (or else the terrible 
inverse of this) is forevermore the fact ! The History of 
England too, had the Fine or other Arts taught us to read 
it right, is the record of the Divine Appearances among us ; 
of the brightnesses out of Heaven that have irradiated our 
terrestrial struggle ; and spanned our wild deluges, and 
weltering seas of trouble, as with celestial rainbows, and 
symbols of eternal covenants. It is the Bible of the Nation : 
what part of it they have laid to heart, and do practically 
know for truth, is the available Bible they have. 

Ask yourselves, What are the eternal covenants which you 
can believe, and dare not for your life's sake but go and 
observe ? These are your Bible, your God's W ord such as it 
may be : these you will continually struggle to obey ; other 
than these, not continually, or authentically at all. Did the 
Maker of this Universe reveal himself, to your believing 
Intellect, in scrip mainly, in Cotton Trades, and profitable 
industries and gamblings ? Here too you will see * miracles ' : 
tubular bridges, gutta-percha telegraphs ; not to speak of 



vm.] JESUITISM 325 

sudden Hudson cornucopias, scrip manna-showers, and pillar- 
of-cloud for all the flunkies, miracles after a sort. Your 
Bible will be a Political Economy; your psalmist and 
evangelist will be M'Croudy ; your practical worship the 
insatiable desire, and continual sacred effort, to make money. 
Bible, of one or the other sort, bible, evangelist, and worship 
you infallibly will have : and some are God-worships, fruit- 
ful in human heroisms, in blessed arts, and deeds long- 
memorable, shining with a sacred splendour of the empyrean 
across all earthly darknesses and contradictions : and some 
again are, to a terrible extent, Devil-worships, fruitful in 
temporary bullion, in upholstery, gluttony and universal 
varnish and gold-leaf; and issuing, alas, at length in street- 
barricades, and a confused return of them to the Devil whose 
they are ! My friend, I have to speak in crude language, the 
wretched times being dumb and deaf: and if thou find no 
truth under this but the phantom of an extinct Hebrew one, 
I at present cannot help it. 

Hengst Invasions, Norman Conquests, Battles of Brunan- 
burg, Battles of Evesham, Towton ; Plantagenets, Wars of 
Roses, Wars of Roundheads : does the fool in his heart 
believe that all this was a Donnybrook Bedlam, originating 
nowhere, proceeding nowhither? His beautifully cultivated 
intellect has given him such interpretation, and no better, of 
the Universe we live in ? He discerns it to be an enormous 
sooty Weaving-shop, and turbid Manufactory of eatables and 
drinkables and wearables ; sparingly supplied with provender 
by the industrious individuals, and much infested by the mad 
and idle. And he can consent to live here ; he does not 
continually think of suicide as a remedy ? The unhappy 
mortal : if a soul ever awaken in him again, his first thought 
will be of prussic-acid, I should say ! 

All History, whether M'Croudy and his Fine Arts know 
the fact or not, is an inarticulate Bible; and in a dim 
intricate manner reveals the Divine Appearances in this lower 
world. For God did make this world, and does forever 



326 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

govern it; the loud-roaring Loom of Time, with all its 
French revolutions, Jewish revelations, ' weaves the vesture 
thou seest Him by/ There is no Biography of a man, much 
less any History, or Biography of a Nation, but wraps in it a 
message out of Heaven, addressed to the hearing ear or to 
the not-hearing. What this Universe is, what the Laws of 
God are, the Life of every man will a little teach it you ; the 
Life of All Men and of All Things, only this could wholly 
teach it you, and you are to be open to learn. 

Who are they, gifted from above, that will convert volu- 
minous Dryasdust into an Epic and even a Bible ? Who 
will smelt, in the all-victorious fire of his soul, these 
scandalous bewildering rubbish-mountains of sleepy Dryasdust, 
till they give-up the golden ingot that lies imprisoned in 
them ? The veritable ' revelation, 1 this, of the ways of God 
to England ; how the Almighty Power, and his mysterious 
Providences, dealt heretofore with England ; more and more 
what the Almighty's judgments with us, his chastisements 
and his beneficences, were ; what the Supreme Will, since 
ushering this English People on the stage of things, has 
guided them to do and to become. Fine Arts, Literatures, 
Poetries ? If they are Human Arts at all, where have they 
been wool-gathering, these centuries long; wandering liter- 
ally like creatures fallen mad ! 

It awakens graver thoughts than were in Marlborough, 
that saying of his, That he knew no English History but 
what he had learned from Shakspeare. In Shakspeare^s grand 
intelligence the History of England, cursory as was his study 
of it, does model itself, for the first time, into something of 
rhythmic and poetic ; there are scattered traits and tones of 
a National Epos in those Historical Plays of his. In Shak- 
speare, more than in another, lay that high votes talent of 
interpreting confused human Actualities, and unfolding what 
divine melodious Ideals, or Thoughts of the Supreme, were 
embodied in them : he, more than any other, might have done 
somewhat towards making History a Bible. But, alas, it was 



327 

not in the Temple of the Nations, with all intelligences 
ministering to him and cooperating with him, that his work- 
shop was laid ; it was in the Bankside Playhouse that Shak- 
speare was set to work, and the sovereign populace had ware 
for their sixpence from him there ! 

After all, I do not blame the poor Fine Arts for taking 
into fiction, and into all the deeper kinds of falsity which 
grow from that. Ignatius, and a world too ready to follow 
him, had discovered the divine virtues of fiction in far higher 
provinces ; the road to fiction lay wide-open for all things ! 
But Nature's eternal voice, inaudible at present or faintly 
audible, proclaims the contrary nevertheless ; and will make 
it known again one day. Fiction, I think, or idle falsity of 
any kind, was never tolerable, except in a world which did 
itself abound in practical lies and solemn shams ; and which 
had gradually impressed on its inhabitants the inane form of 
character tolerant of that kind of ware. A serious soul, can 
it wish, even in hours of relaxation, that you should fiddle 
empty nonsense to it ? A serious soul would desire to be 
entertained, either with absolute silence, or with what was 
truth, and had fruit in it, and was made by the Maker of us 
all. With the idle soul I can fancy it far otherwise ; but 
only with the idle. 

Given an idle potentate, monster of opulence, gluttonous 
bloated Nawaub, of black colour or of white, naturally he 
will have prating story-tellers to amuse his half-sleepy hours 
of rumination ; if from his deep gross stomach, sinking over- 
loaded as if towards its last torpor, they can elicit any 
transient glow of interest, tragic or comic, especially any 
wrinkle of momentary laughter, however idle, great shall be 
their reward. Wits, story-tellers, ballad-singers, especially 
dancing-girls who understand their trade, are in much request 
with such gluttonous half-sleeping, black or white Monster of 
Opulence. A bevy of supple dancing-girls who with the due 
mixture (mixture settled by custom), and with not more than 



328 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

the due mixture, of lascivious fire, will represent to him, 
brandishing their daggers, and rhythmically chanting and 
posturing, the Loves of Vishnu, Loves of Adonis, Death of 
Psyche, Barber of Seville, or whatever nonsense there may be, 
according to time or country : these are the kind of artists 
fit for such unfortunate stuffed stupefied Nawaub, in his hours 
of rumination ; upon these his hot heavy-laden eye may rest 
without abhorrence ; if with perceptible momentary satis- 
faction emerging from his bottomless ennui, then victory 
and gold-purses to the artist; be such artist crowned with 
laurel or with parsley, and declared divine in presence of all 
men. 

Luxurious Europe, in its reading publics, dilettanti, cog- 
noscenti and other publics, is wholly one big ugly Nawaub of 
that kind ; who has converted all the Fine Arts into after- 
dinner amusements ; slave adjuncts to his cookeries, uphol- 
steries, tailories, and other palpably Coarse Arts. The 
brutish monster has turned all the Nine Muses, who by birth 
are sacred Priestesses of Heaven, into scandalous Bayaderes ; 
and they dance with supple motions, to enlighten the vile 
darkness of his ennui for him. Too truly mad, these poor 
Fine Arts ! The Coarse Arts too, if he had not an authentic 
stomach and skin, which always bring him a little right again 
in those departments, would go mad. 

How all things hang together ! Universal Jesuitism having 
once lodged itself in the heart, you will see it in the very 
finger-nails by and by. Calculate how far it is from Sophocles 
and ^Eschylus to Knowles and Scribe ; how Homer has 
gradually changed into Sir Harris Nicolas ; or what roads the 
human species must have travelled before a Psalm of David 
could become an Opera at the Haymarket, and men, with 
their divine gift of Music, instead of solemnly celebrating the 
highest fact, or * singing to the praise of God,' consented to 
celebrate the lowest nonsense, and sing to the praise of Jenny 
Lind and the Gazza Ladra, perhaps the step from Oliver 



viii.] JESUITISM 329 

Cromwell to Lord John Russell will not seem so uncon- 
scionable ! I find it within, and not without, the order of 
Nature ; and that all things, like all men, are blood-relations 
to one another. 

This accursed nightmare, which we name Jesuitism, will 
have to vanish ; our comfort is, that life itself is not much 
longer possible otherwise. But I say, have you computed 
what a distance forwards it may be towards some new Psalm 
of David done with our new appliances, ard much improved 
wind-instruments, grammatical and other? That is the dis- 
tance of the new Golden Age, my friend ; not less than that, 
I lament to say ! And the centuries that intervene are a 
foul agonistic welter through the Stygian seas of mud : a long 
Scavenger Age> inevitable where the Mother of Abominations 
has long dwelt. 



It is to be hoped one is not blind withal to the celebrated 
virtues that are in Jesuitism ; to its missionary zeal, its con- 
tempt of danger, its scientific, heroic and other prowesses, of 
which there is such celebrating. I do not doubt that there 
are virtues in it ; that we and it, along with this immeasur- 
able sea of miseries which it has brought upon us, shall 
ultimately get the benefit of its virtues too. Peruvian bark, 
of use in human agues ; tidings from the fabulous East by 
D^erbelot, Du Halde, and others ; examples of what human 
energy and faculty are equal to, even under the inspiration of 
Ignatius : nothing of this small residue of pearls from such 
a continent of putrid shellfish, shall be lost to the world. 
Nay, I see, across this black deluge of Consecrated Falsity, 
the world ripening towards glorious new developments, un~ 
imagined hitherto, of which this abominable mud deluge 
itself, threatening to submerge us all, was the inevitable 
precursor, and the means decreed by the Eternal. If it please 
Heaven, we shall all yet make our Exodus from Houndsditch, 
and bid the sordid continents, of once rich apparel now 



330 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

grown poisonous Oit-do\ a mild farewell ! Exodus into 
wider horizons, into God's daylight once more ; where eternal 
skies, measuring more than three ells, shall again overarch 
us ; and men, immeasurably richer for having dwelt among 
the Hebrews, shall pursue their human pilgrimage, St. 
Ignatius and much other saintship, and superstitious terror 
and lumber, lying safe behind us, like the nightmares of a 
sleep that is past ! 

I said the virtue of obedience was not to be found except 
among the Jesuits : how, in fact, among the ^wtfi-Jesuits, 
still in a revolutionary posture in this world, can you expect 
it ? Sansculottism is a rebel ; has its birth, and being, in 
open mutiny ; and cannot give you examples of obedience. 
It is so with several other virtues and cardinal virtues ; they 
seem to have vanished from the world ; and I often say to 
myself, Jesuitism and other Superstitious Scandals cannot go, 
till we have read and appropriated from them the tradition 
of these lost noblenesses, and once more under the new con- 
ditions made them ours. Jesuitism, the Papa with his three 
hats, and whole continents of chimerical lumber will then 
go ; their errand being wholly done. We cannot make our 
Exodus from Houndsditch till we have got our own along 
with us ! The Jew old-clothes having now grown fairly 
pestilential, a poisonous incumbrance in the path of men, 
burn them up with revolutionary fire, as you like and can : 
even so, but you shall not quit the place till you have 
gathered from their ashes what of gold or other enduring 
metal was sewed upon them, or woven in the tissue of them. 
That is the appointed course of human things. 

Here are two excerpts from the celebrated Gathercoal, a 
Yankee friend of mine ; which flash strangely a kind of torch- 
gleam into the hidden depths ; and indicate to us the grave 
and womb of Jesuitism, and of several other things : 

* Moses and the Jews did not make God's Laws,' exclaims 
he ; * no, by no means ; they did not even read them in a 
way that has been final, or is satisfactory to me ! In several 



vm.] JESUITISM 331 

important respects I find said reading decidedly bad ; and 
will not, in any wise, think of adopting it. How dare I, 
think you ? And yet, alas, if we forget to read these Laws 
at all ; if we go along as if they were not there ! 

* My enlightened friends of this present supreme age, what 
shall I say to you ? That Time does rest on Eternity ; that 
he who has no vision of Eternity will never get a true hold of 
Time, or its affairs. Time is so constructed ; that is the fact 
of the construction of this world. And no class of mortals 
who have not, through Nazareth or otherwise, come to 
get heartily acquainted with such fact, perpetually familiar 
with it in all the outs and ins of their existence, have 
ever found this Universe habitable long. Alas, no ; their 
fraternities, equalities, free-trade philosophies, greatest-happi- 
ness principles, soon came to a conclusion ; and the poor 
creatures had to go, to the Devil, I fear ! Generations 
such as ours play a curious part in World-History. 

* They sit as Apes do round a fire in the woods, but know 
not how to feed it with fresh sticks. They have to quit it 
soon, and march into Chaos, as I conjecture ; into that 
land of which Bedlam is the Mount Zion. The world turns 
out not to be made of mere eatables and drinkables, of news- 
paper puff's, gilt carriages, conspicuous flunkies ; no, but of 
something other than these ! Old Suetonius Romans, corrupt 
babbling Greeks of the Lower Empire, examples more than 
one : consider them ; be taught by them, add not to the 
number of them. Heroism, not the apery and traditions of 
Heroism ; the feeling, spoken or silent, that in man's life 
there did lie a Godlike, and that his Time-history was verily 
but an emblem of some Eternal : without this there had been 
no Rome either; it was this that had made old Rome, old 
Greece, and old Judea. Apes, with their wretched blinking 
eyes, squatted round a fire which they cannot feed with 
new wood ; which they say will last forever without new 
wood, or, alas, which they say is going out forever : it is a 
sad sight ! ' 



332 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO 

Elsewhere my eccentric friend, as some call him, whose 
centre, however, I think I have got into, has this passage : 

* Church, do you say ? Look eighteen hundred years ago, 
in the stable at Bethlehem : an infant laid in a manger ! 
Look, thou ass, and behold it ; it is a fact, the most 
indubitable of facts : thou wilt thereby learn innumerable 
things. Jesus of Nazareth and the life he led, and the death 
he died, does it teach thee nothing ? Through this, as 
through a miraculous window, the heaven of Martyr Heroism, 
the "divine depths of Sorrow," of noble Labour, and the 
unspeakable silent expanses of Eternity, first in man's history 
disclose themselves. The admiration of all nobleness, divine 
worship of godlike nobleness, how universal it is in the 
history of man ! 

* But mankind, that singular entity mankind, is like the 
fertilest, fluidest, most wondrous element, an element in which 
the strangest things crystallise themselves, and spread out in 
the most astounding growths. The event at Bethlehem was 
of the Year One ; but all years since that, eighteen hundred 
of them now, have been contributing new growth to it, and 
see, there it stands : the Church ! Touching the earth with 
one small point ; springing out of one small seedgrain, rising 
out therefrom, ever higher, ever broader, high as the Heaven 
itself, broad till it overshadow the whole visible Heaven and 
Earth, and no star can be seen but through it. From such 
a seedgrain so has it grown ; planted in the reverences and 
sacred opulences of the soul of mankind ; fed continually by 
all the noblenesses of some forty generations of men. The 
world-tree of the Nations for so long ! 

* Alas, if its roots are now dead, and it have lost hold of 
the firm earth, or clear belief of mankind, what, great as 
it is, can by possibility become of it ? Shaken to and fro, 
in Jesuitisms, Gorham Controversies, and the storms of 
inevitable Fate, it must sway hither and thither; nod ever 
farther from the perpendicular ; nod at last too far ; and, 
sweeping the Eternal Heavens clear of its old brown foliage 



viii.] JESUITISM 

and multitudinous rooks'-nests, come to the ground with 
much confused crashing, and disclose the diurnal and noc- 
turnal Upper Lights again ! The dead world-tree will have 
declared itself dead. It will lie there an imbroglio of torn 
boughs and ruined fragments, of bewildered splittings and 
wide-spread shivers : out of which the poor inhabitants must 
make what they can ! 1 Enough now of Gathercoal and his 
torch-gleams. 

Simple souls still clamour occasionally for what they call 
' a new religion. 1 My friends, you will not get this new 
religion of yours ; I perceive, you already have it, have 
always had it ! All that is true is your ' religion, 1 is it not ? 
Commanded by the Eternal God to be performed^ I should 
think, if it is true ! Do you not already, in your dim heads, 
know truths by the thousand ; and yet, in your dead hearts, 
will you perform them by the ten, by the unit? New 
religion ! One last word with you on this rather con- 
temptible subject. 

You say, The old ages had a noble belief about the world, 
and therefore were capable of a noble activity in the world. 
My friends, it is partly true : your Scepticism and Jesuitism, 
your ignoble no-belief, except what belief a beaver or judicious 
pig were capable of, is too undeniable : observe, however, that 
in this your fatal misery, there is action and reaction ; and do 
not confound the one with the other. Put the thing in its 
right posture ; cart not before horse, if you would make an 
effort to stir from this fatal spot ! It is your own falsity that 
makes the Universe incredible. I affirm to you, this Universe, 
in all times, and in your own poor time as well, is the express 
image and direct counterpart of the human souls, and their 
thoughts and activities, who dwell there. It is a true adage, 
* As the fool thinks, the bell clinks.' 'This mad Universe/ 
says Novalis, ' is the waste picture of your own dream. 1 Be 
noble of mind, all Nature gives response to your heroic struggle 
for recognition by her ; with her awful eternal voices answers 



334 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

to every mind, " Yea, I am divine ; be thou." From the 
cloud -whirl wind speaks a God yet, my friend, to every man 
who has a human soul. To the inhuman brute-soul, indeed, 
she answers, " Yea, I am brutal ; a big cattle-stall, rag-fair 
and St. Catherine's wharf: enter thou, and fat victual, if 
thou be faithful, shall not fail." 

Not because Heaven existed, did men know Good from 
Evil ; the ' because, 1 I invite you to consider, lay quite the 
other way. It was because men, having hearts as well as 
stomachs, felt there, and knew through all their being, the 
difference between Good and Evil, that Heaven and Hell first 
came to exist. That is the sequence ; that and not the con- 
trary. If you have now no Heaven to look to ; if you now 
sprawl, lamed and lost, sunk to the chin in the pathless 
sloughs of this lower world without guidance from above, 
know that the fault is not Heaven's at all ; but your own ! 
Our poor friends * the Apes by the Dead Sea ' have now no 
Heaven either ; they look into this Universe now, and find it 
tragically grown to be the Humbug they insisted on its being. 
Moses went his ways, and this enchantment fell upon them ! 
Such 'enchantments' rhadamanthine Nature does yet daily 
execute on the rebellious ; he that has eyes may still daily 
see them, fearful and wonderful ever as of old. 

How can you believe in a Heaven, the like of you ? 
What struggle in your mean existence ever pointed thither- 
ward ? None. The first heroic soul sent down into this 
world, he, looking up into the sea of stars, around into the 
moaning forests and big oceans, into life and death, love and 
hate, and joy and sorrow, and the illimitable loud- thundering 
Loom of Time, was struck dumb by it (as the thought of 
every earnest soul still is) ; and fell on his face, and with his 
heart cried for salvation in the world-whirlpool : to him the 
* open secret of this Universe ' was no longer quite a secret, 
but he had caught a glimpse of it, much hidden from the 
like of us in these times : " Do nobly, thou shalt resemble the 
Maker of all this; do ignobly, the Enemy of the Maker." 



Vlll.] JESUITISM 335 

This is the ' divine sense of Right and Wrong in man ' ; true 
reading of his position in this Universe forevermore ; the 
indisputable GodVmessage still legible in every created heart, 
though speedily erased and painted over, under ' articles, 1 
and cants and empty ceremonials, in so many hearts ; making 
the ' open secret ' a very shut one indeed ! 

My friends, across these fogs of murky twaddle and philan- 
thropism, in spite of sad decadent ' world-trees,' with their 
rookeries of foul creatures, the silent stars, and all the 
eternal luminaries of the world, shine even now to him that 
has an eye. In this day as in all days, around and in every 
man, are voices from the gods, imperative to all, if obeyed by 
even none, which say audibly, " Arise, thou son of Adam, son 
of Time ; make this thing more divine ; and that thing, and 
thyself, of all things ; and work, and sleep not ; for the Night 
cometh, wherein no man can work ! " He that has an ear 
may still hear. 

Surely, surely this ignoble sluggishness, sceptical torpor, 
indifference to all that does not bear on Mammon and his 
interests is not the natural state of human creatures ; and is 
not doomed to be their final one ! Other states once were, 
or there had never been a Society, or any noble thing, among 
us at all. Under this brutal stagnancy there lies painfully 
imprisoned some tendency which could become heroic. 

The restless gnawing ennui which, like a dark dim ocean- 
flood, communicating with the Phlegethons and Stygian deeps, 
begirdles every human life so guided, is it not the painful 
cry even of that imprisoned heroism ? Imprisoned it will 
never rest ; set forth at present, on these sad terms, it cannot 
be. You unfortunates, what is the use of your money-bags, 
of your territories, funded properties, your mountains of 
possessions, equipments and mechanic inventions, which the 
flunky pauses over, awestruck, and almost rises into epos and 
prophecy at sight of ? No use, or less than none. Your skin 
is covered, and your digestive and other bodily apparatus 



336 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS [NO. 

is supplied ; and you have but to wish in these respects, 
and more is ready; and the Devils, I think, are quizzing 
you. You ask for * happiness,' " O give me happiness ! "- 
and they hand you ever new varieties of covering for the skin, 
ever new kinds of supply for the digestive apparatus, new 
and ever new, worse or not a whit better than the old ; 
and and this is your ' happiness ' ? As if you were sick 
children ; as if you were not men, but a kind of apes ! 

I rather say, be thankful for your ennui ; it is your last 
mark of manhood ; this at least is a perpetual admonition, and 
true sermon preached to you. From the chair of verity this, 
whatever chairs be chairs of cantity. Happiness is not come, 
nor like to come ; ennui, with its great waste ocean-voice, 
moans answer, Never, never. That ocean-voice, I tell you, is 
a great fact, it comes from Phlegethon and the gates of the 
Abyss ; its bodeful never-resting inexorable moan is the voice 
of primeval Fate, and of the eternal necessity of things. Will 
you shake away your nightmare and arise ; or must you lie 
writhing under it, till death relieve you ? Unfortunate crea- 
tures ! You are fed, clothed, lodged as men never were 
before ; every day in new variety of magnificence are you 
equipped and attended to ; such wealth of material means as 
is now yours was never dreamed of by man before : and to 
do any noble thing, with all this mountain of implements, is 
forever denied you. Only ignoble, expensive and unfruitful 
things can you now do ; nobleness has vanished from the 
sphere where you live. The way of it is lost, lost ; the possi- 
bility of it has become incredible. We must try to do 
without it, I am told. Well ; rejoice in your upholsteries 
and cookeries, then, if so be they will make you * happy. 1 
Let the varieties of them be continual and innumerable. In 
all things let perpetual change, if that is a perpetual blessing 
to you, be your portion instead of mine ; incur that Prophet's 
curse, and in all things in this sublunary world * make your- 
selves like unto a wheel.' Mount into your railways ; whirl 
from place to place, at the rate of fifty, or if you like of five 



VIIL] JESUITISM 337 

hundred miles an hour : you cannot escape from that inexor- 
able all-encircling ocean-moan of ennui. No : if you would 
mount to the stars, and do yacht-voyages under the belts of 
Jupiter, or stalk deer on the ring of Saturn, it would still 
begirdle you. You cannot escape from it, you can but 
change your place in it, without solacement except one 
moment's. That prophetic Sermon from the Deeps will 
continue with you, till you wisely interpret it and do it, or 
else till the Crack of Doom swallow it and you. Adieu: 
Au revoir. 



SUMMARY 



No. I. THE PRESENT TIME 

THE Present ever a ' New Era ' to the thinking man : To know it, and 
what it bids us do, the sum of knowledge for us all. Judicial blindness. 
Our own days : If not days of endless hope too, then are they days of 
utter despair (p. 1). A Reforming Pope, and the huge ttwreformable 
Popedom. The Sicilians first to follow the poor Pope's example. 
French exasperation and emulation. European explosion, boundless, 
uncontrollable : All Kings conscious they are but Playactors. A 
weltering mob, presided over by M. de Lamartine. A changed time 
since the word Senior was first devised to signify Superior (2). Universal 
Democracy, an inevitable fact of the days we live in : Whence comes it ? 
whither goes it? What is the meaning of it? High shouts of exultation 
from the universal foolish human throat ; drowning for the moment 
all reflection whatsoever. Bankruptcy of Imposture : At all costs, it is 
to be prayed by all men that Shams may cease. Heavyside, and his 
quiet blasphemy. Democracy not a Government; nor Parliament a 
practical substitute for a King. Unanimity of ' voting ' will do nothing 
for us, if the voting happen to be wrong. A divine message, or eternal 
regulation of the Universe, there verily is, in regard to every conceivable 
procedure of man. Universal Suffrage, and the Ballot-box (8). The 
ancient Republics, now pretty well admitted to be nothing to our purpose. 
One modern instance of Democracy, f nearly perfect ' : The Republic of 
the United States. America too will have to strain her energies, in quite 
other fashion than this : America's Battle is yet to fight. Mere 
Democracy forever impossible : The Universe itself a Monarchy and 
Hierarchy. God Almighty's Noble in the supreme place, under penalties. 
Everlasting privilege of the Foolish, to be governed and guided by the 
Wise : Intrinsically, the harshest duty a wise man, if he be indeed wise, 
has laid to his hand (18). The new Sacrament of Divorce, called 
'enfranchisement,' ' emancipation.' West-Indian Blacks and Irish 
Whites": Horses and /ta//"-brothers : The fate of all emancipated Helpless- 
ness, sooner or later, tragically inevitable. British industrial existence 
fast becoming one huge poison-swamp of reeking pestilence : Thirty- 
thousand outcast, ungoverned, unguided Needlewomen. Constituted 
Anarchy: 'British Liberty/ and what is it doing for us (24). England 

839 



340 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 

and her Constitution, the model of the world : At once unattainable by 
the world, and not worth attaining. Called a ' second time ' to show the 
Nations how to live. England's one hope : Many Kings, not needing 
' election ' to command : Poor England never so needed them as now. 
The true 'commander' and King: Not quite discoverable by riddling 
of the popular clamour. The fateful Hebrew Prophecy, sounding daily 
through our streets. In regard to choice of men, next to no capability 
on the part of universal suffrage. The few Wise will have, by one 
method or another, to take, and to keep, command of the innumerable 
Foolish (30). Captains of Industry: Organisation of Labour, the new 
strange task which no Government can much longer escape. Speech of 
the British Prime Minister to his Pauper Populations and the Respect- 
able Professors of the Dismal Science. Alas, there are things that 
should be done, not spoken ; that till the doing of them is begun, cannot 
be spoken (35). 

No. II. MODEL PRISONS 

The deranged condition of our affairs : Two ways of proceeding in 
regard to them : Selfish indifference, and self-lauding philanthropy. 
Indiscriminate mashing-up of Right and Wrong, ending in a Fraternity 
like Cain's (p. 48). A London Prison of the exemplary or model 
kind. Certain Chartist notabilities undergoing their term. The 
Captain of the place, a true aristos and commander of men. His 
problem, to drill twelve-hundred scoundrels to do nothing, by 'the 
method of kindness.' Happy Devil's regiments of the line, what soldier 
to any earthly or celestial Power has such lodging and attendance as 
you here ! Certainly it should not be the Devil's regiments of the line 
that a servant of God would first of all concentrate his attention on. 
Precisely the worst investment for Benevolence that human ingenuity 
could select. The highest and best investment : Solemn Shams and 
Supreme Quacks, riding prosperously in every thoroughfare (52). 
Howard the Philanthropist, a sort of beatified individual : A dull 
practical solid man, full of English accuracy and veracity. Not the only 
benefactor that has worked without money for us : The Destinies opulent. 
Milton, Kepler, Dante. Cholera Doctors ; Soldiers : Human virtue, if 
we went down to the roots of it, not so rare. Woe to us, it is so seldom 
elaborated, and built into a result ! The Benevolent-Platform Fever, 
and general morbid sympathy, instead of hearty hatred, for scoundrels. 
Brotherhood ? Be the thought far from me. Beautiful Black Peasantry, 
fallen idle: Interesting White Felonry, not idle. What a reflection, 
that we cannot bestow on an unworthy man any particle of our ' bene- 
volence,' without withdrawing it from one to whom it of right belongs ! 



SUMMARY 841 

One thing needful for the world ; but that one indispensable : Give us 
Justice, and we live ; give us only counterfeits or succedanea, and we 
die. Modern ghastly Phantasm of Christianity, which they sing litanies 
to at Exeter Hall and elsewhere. Poor old Genius of Reform, and his 
Program of a new Era (62). Christian Religion, and its healthy 
hatred of Scoundrels : From the Christianity of Oliver Cromwell to that 
of Mr. Hesperus Fiddlestring, what a road have we travelled ! Gospel 
according to the Platform ; Exeat Fiddlestring. Poor creatures, making 
and unmaking ' Laws,' in whose souls is no image or thought of Heaven's 
Law: Human Statute-books, growing horrible to think of (70). What 
to do with our criminals ? An official Law-dignitary's bland perplexity, 
and placid discomfiture. Wonderful to hear what account we give of the 
punishment of our criminals : No ' revenge ' ; O Heavens, no ! Cant 
moral, Cant religious, Cant political. Hunger-stricken asphyxied hearts, 
calling themselves ' Christian.' Woe to the People that no longer 
venerate, as the emblem of God himself, the aspect of Human Worth ! 
The true ground on which to deliberately slay a disarmed fellow-man : 
'Revenge,' and the ineradicable tendency to revancher oneself on the 
wrong-doer, to pay him what he has merited. How it shall be done? 
a vast question, involving immense considerations. Terrible penalties of 
neglecting to treat hero as hero, and scoundrel as scoundrel : Dim 
oblivion of Right and Wrong : World-wide maddening Misery : New 
astonishing Phallus-Worship, and universal Sacrament of Divorce (72). 
The Ancient Germans, and their grim public executions. Scoundrel 
is scoundrel ; and no soft blubbering and litanying over him can make 
him a friend of this Universe. A 'didactic sermon,' as no spoken 
sermon could be. Except upon a basis of just rigour, sorrowful, silent, 
inexorable, no true Pity possible (82). A worst man in England, 
curious to think of, whom it would be inexpressibly advantageous to 
lay hold of, and hang, first of all : Alas, our supreme scoundrel, alike 
with our supreme hero, very far from being known. Parliament, in its 
liwmakings, must really try to obtain some vision again. Let us to the 
wellheads, to the Chief Fountains of these waters of bitterness ; and there 
strike home and dig ! (83). 

No. III. DOWNING STREET 

Ineffectually of our Redtape Establishments. The Colonial Office, a 
world-wide jungle, inhabited by doleful creatures, deaf or nearly so to 
human reason and entreaty. Foreign Office and Home Office perhaps even 
more impracticable : Hercules-Harlequin, the Attorney Triumphant, the 
World's Busybody, these not the parts this Nation has a turn for. 
Proposed curtailments, rectifications and reformations (p. 87). England's 



342 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 

forlorn hope in Sir Robert Peel : The one likely or possible man. A 
Reformed Executive in Downing Street : Not a better Talking- Apparatus, 
but an infinitely better Acting-Apparatus the thing wanted. The Irish 
Giant advancing unheeded upon London itself (i)l). Two kinds of 
fundamental error in our Government Offices : The work ill-done ; and, 
what is still fntaler, the wrong kind of work. For such elaborated Idleness 
a stupid subaltern better than a gifted one. O for an eye that could see 
in those hideous mazes, and a heart that could dare and do ! (94). 
What the British Nation at this time really wants. If our Government 
is to be a No-Government, what matter who administers it? The real 
Nimrod of this era the rat-catcher. The mighty question, Who is to be 
our Premier, and take in hand the ' spigot of taxation ' ? Right Honour- 
able Zero, on his Sleswick thunder-horse. Who made those Downing 
Street Offices? No edifice of State that stands long, but has had the 
wise and brave contributing their lives to it. William Conqueror's 
Home Office. An English Seventy-four, and the old Seakings and Saxon 
Pirates (98). 'Human Stupidity' the accursed parent of all our sorrows. 
Practical reverence for Human Worth the outcome and essence of all 
true ' religions ' whatsoever. Human Intellect, the exact summary of 
Human Worth. Abler Men in Downing Street ; that, sure enough, would 
gradually remedy whatsoever has gone wrong amongst us. The divinest, 
most Herculean Ten Men to be found among the English Twenty-seven 
Millions. Courage ; let us strive all thitherward as towards a door of 
hope ! One Intellect still really human, not to be dispensed with 
anywhere in the affairs of men : Only Wisdom, that can recognise wisdom, 
and attract it, as with divine magnetism, from the modest corners where 
it lies hid (105). To increase the supply of human Intellect in Downing 
Street, what ' method ' alas ! One small Project of Improvement : 
Government Servants to be selected without reference to their power of 
getting into Parliament : The Crown to have power to elect a few 
members. Beneficent germs, which one truly wise man as Chief 
Minister might ripen into living practices, invaluable to us all. A 
population counting by Millions from which to choose, were a seat in 
Parliament not primary : Robert Burns. All true ' Democracy ' in this, 
that the able man be chosen, in whatever rank he be found : A truer and 
truer ' Aristocracy,' or Government of the Best (112). One true Reform- 
ing Statesman ; he the preliminary of all good. A strange feeling, to be 
at the apex of English affairs. This world, solid as it looks, made all of 
aerial and even of spiritual stuff. This and the other Premier seems to 
take it with perfect coolness : Reflections, sufficient to annihilate any 
man, almost before starting ! Ask well, who is your Chief Governor, for 
around him men like to him will infallibly gather. Time was when an 
incompetent Governor could not be permitted among men (121). 



SUMMARY 343 

No. IV. THE NEW DOWNING STREET 

How the European Governments came to wreck for want of Intellect. 
No evil, or solecism against Nature, ever yet wrought its own cure. 
Intellect has to govern, and will do it ; if not in alliance, then in hostility : 
Every Government absolves or convicts itself, before God and man, 
according as it determines which (p. 126). The old Catholic Church, in 
its terrestrial relations to the State : Everywhere a road upwards for 
human nobleness lay wide open to all men. Over Europe generally the 
State has died ; incapable in these years of any but galvanic life. The 
kind of heroes that come mounted on the shoulders of universal suffrage. 
England called as no Nation ever was, to summon out its Kings, and set 
them to their work : A New Downing Street, inhabited by the gifted ; 
directing all its energies upon real and living interests (131). The 
notion that Government can do nothing but 'keep the peace.' To be 
governed by small men, profess subjection to phantasms, not only a mis- 
fortune, but a curse and sin. Indigent Millionaires, and their owl- 
dreams of Political Economy. Only the man of worth can recognise 
worth in men. How a New Downing Street might gradually come (136). 
The Foreign Office, in its reformed state : Insignificance of recent 
European Wars. Our War-soldiers Industrial ; doing nobler than 
Roman works, when fighting is not wanted of them. Ministers of 
Works, of Justice, of Education : Tomorrow morning they might all 
begin to be ! (143). Constitutions for the Colonies now on the anvil : 
f So many as are for rebelling, hold up your hands ! ' Our brave fathers, 
by valiant blood and sweat, gained for us rich possessions in all zones ; 
and we, wretched imbeciles, cannot do the function of administering 
them. Miserabler theory than that of money on the ledger for the 
primary rule of Empires, cannot well be propounded : England will not 
readily admit that her own children are worth nothing but to be flung 
out of doors. Canadian Parliaments, and Lumber-log Governors. Choose 
well your Governor ; and having found him, keep him (149). The Home 
Office, undoubtedly our grand primary concern. Were all men doing 
their duty, or even seriously trying to do it, there would be no Pauper : 
Pauperism, our Social Sin grown manifest. Our Public Life and our 
Private, our State and our Religion, a tissue of half-truths and whole-lies : 
Cicero's Roman Augurs and their divine chicken-bowels : Despicable 
amalgam of true and false. A complete course of scavengerism, the thing 
needed. The State, as it gets into the track of its real work, will find it 
expand into whole continents of new activity : The want of wants, more 
indispensable than any jewel in the crown, that of men able to command 
men in the ways of welldoing (156). Waste-land Industrials succeeding, 
other kinds of Industry will be found capable of regimenting. He is a 



344 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 

good man that can command and obey ; he that cannot is a bad. Etons 
and Oxfords, with their broken crumbs of mere speech : Our next set of 
Souls' Overseers, perhaps silent very mainly. Who of living statesmen 
will begin the long steep journey of Reform ? Sir Robert Peel at his 
( eleventh hour.' Still fataler omens (166). 

No. V. STUMP-ORATOR 

Our deep-rooted habit of considering human talent as best of all 
evincing itself in eloquent speech : Such a test liable to become the very 
worst ever devised. Hard sayings for many a British reader : The 
talker established in the place of honour ; and the Doer lost and lamed 
in the obscure crowd. Eloquence, and the part it now plays in our 
affairs, one of the gravest phenomena (p. 172). Universities and Schools 
in the old healthy Ages : The Working Man ; Priest ; young Noble : 
The one sure method of learning anything, practical apprenticeship to 
it. Not that he may speak, but that he may have something to speak of, 
the first need of a man. Every word, either a note or a forged-note. 
Do you want a man not to practise what he believes, then encourage him 
to speak it often in words : The serviceable thing, to clip-off a bit of 
his eloquent tongue. What the art of speech should be, and should not 
be (177). Vital lungs of Society : Methods by which men rise ; and the 
kind of men. The country that can offer no career, a doomed country ; 
nay, already dead. Our English careers to born genius twofold : Silent 
or unlearned career of Industrialisms : Articulate or learned career of 
the three Professions. To the gifted soul, not of taciturn, beaver 
nature, the field in England narrow and surprising to an extreme : The 
solitary proof-feat of talk, getting rather monotonous. Medicine, and its 
frightful medusa-heads of quackery : The profession of Human Healer 
radically a sacred one. Law and Church : Ingenuous souls just now 
shudder at the threshold of both these careers. Parliament, and its 
unquestioned eligibility, if attainable. Crowded portal of Literature : 
Haven of expatriated spiritualisms, vanities and prurient imbecilities. 
Talk with tongue or pen ; there is in our England of the Nineteenth 
Century, that one method of emergence and no other (183). Not even 
in Parliament should the essential function by any means be talk. 
Wisdom intrinsically of silent nature. Politeness, and breeding to 
business : How politeness was invented : Johnson, Burns. Parliament, 
as a school of manners: Seeking salvation in 'appearances.' A par- 
liamentary bagpipe, and your living man fled away without return (194). 
Nature admits no lie : Most men profess to be aware of this, but few 
in any manner lay it to heart. Diagnosis of a Lie, and Liar. Fail, by 
any sin or misfortune, to discover what the truth of a fact is, you are 



SUMMARY 345 

lost so far as that fact goes : Unfortunate British Parliament. Nature's 
silent exact Savings'-bank, and official register, correct to the most 
evanescent item : Creditor, by the quantity of veracities we have done ; 
Debtor, by the quantity of falsities and errors. The practice of modern 
Parliaments, with Reporters sitting among them (201). A benevolent 
plan of reform for our benighted world : At least one generation to pass 
its life in silence. Good Heavens, if such a plan were practicable, how 
the chaff might be winnowed-out of every man and thing ! Eye-service, 
our saddest woe of all. ' Public-speaking,' ' parliamentary eloquence,' 
a Moloch before whom young souls are made to pass through the fire, 
to come out spiritually dead. Be not a Public Orator, thou brave young 
British man ; not a Stump-Orator, if thou canst help it : To speak, or 
to write, Nature did not peremptorily order thee ; but to work she did 
(209). 

No. VI. PARLIAMENTS 

The present Editor not one of those who expect to see the Country 
saved by farther ' reforming ' the reformed Parliament we have got. If 
the captains of the ship are of that scandalous class who refuse to be 
warned, what are the miserable crew to do? (p. 214). The English Par- 
liament, windy and empty as it has grown to be, at one time a quite solid 
serious actuality : King Rufus and his Barons : The time of the Edwards, 
when Parliament gradually split itself into Two Houses. The Long 
Parliament the first that declared itself Sovereign in the Nation. A sad 
gradual falling-off in modern Parliaments : A solemn Convocation of all 
the Stump-Orators in the Nation, to come and govern us, not seen in the 
earth until recently (216). Two grand modern facts, which have altered 
from top to bottom the function and position of all Parliaments. An 
Unfettered Press : Not the discussion of questions, only the ultimate 
voting of them, requires to go on, or can veritably go on, in St. Stephen's 
now. Still more important the question, King present there, or no 
King ? Not as a Sovereign Ruler of the Twenty-seven million British 
souls has the reformed Parliament distinguished itself as yet. Another 
most unfortunate condition, that your Parliamentary Assembly is not 
much in earnest to do even the best it can. Parliaments, admirable only 
as Advising Bodies. United States. Only Two Parliaments of any 
actual Sovereignty : The English Long Parliament, and the French 
Convention. The horoscope of Parliaments by no means cheering at 
present : The thing we vitally need, not a more and more perfectly 
elected Parliament, but some reality of a Ruling Sovereign to preside 
over Parliament (220). Poor human beings, whose practical belief is, 
that if we ( vote ' this or that, so this or that will thenceforth be. Blunder- 



346 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 

ing, impious, pretended ' laws ' : Is arithmetic a thing more fixed by the 
Eternal than the laws of justice are? Eternal Law, silently present 
everywhere and every when. 'Voting' a thing of little value at any 
time : If of ten men, nine are recognisable as fools, how will you ever 
get a ballot-box to grind-out a wisdom from their 'votes'? (233). 
Under whatever Reformed Downing Street England be governed, its 
Parliament too will continue indispensable: We must set it to its real 
function ; and, at our peril and its, restrict it to that. Necessary to the 
King or Governor to know what the mass of men think upon public 
questions : He may thus choose his path with prudence ; and reach his 
aim surely, if more slowly. The Leming-rat, and its rigidly straight 
course nowhither. The mass of men consulted at the hustings upon any 
high matter, as ugly an exhibition of human stupidity as this world sees. 
The vulgarest vulgar, not those in ragged coats at this day ; the more 
the pity. Of what use towards the finding-out what it is wise to do can 
the ' fool's vote ' be ? You have to apprise the unwise man of his road, 
even as you do the unwiser horse. Memorable minorities, and even 
email ones : Cromwell and his Puritans : Tancred of Hauteville's sons 
Unit of that class, against as many zeros as you like (238). What is to 
become of Parliament, less a question than what is to become of Downing 
Street. Who is slave, and eternally appointed to be governed ; who/ree, 
and eternally appointed to govern. Could we entirely exclude the slave's 
vote, and admit only the heroic free man's vote, the ultimate New Era, 
and best possible condition of human affairs, had actually come. New 
definitions of slavery, and of freedom. To the Free Man belongs eternally 
the government of the world (247). 

No. VII. HUDSON'S STATUE 

The question ' Shall Cromwell have a Statue ? ' A People worthy to 
build Statues to Cromwell ; or worthy only of doing it to Hudson. Show 
the man you honour ; and you show what your Ideal of Manhood is, 
what kind of man you long inexpressibly to be. Pity Hudson's Statue 
was not completed and set up, so that all the world might see it : The 
practical English mind has its own notions of the Supreme Excellence ; 
and in this of Hudson there was more of real worship than is usual 
(p. 254). If the world were not properly anarchic, this question of a 
Statue would be one of the greatest and most solemn for it : Not lightly 
will a man give his ' reverence,' if he be still a man. A Hierarchy of 
Beneficences ; the noblest man at the summit of affairs, and in every place 
the due gradation of the fittest for the place : All hangs upon giving our 
approval aright. How Statues are now got up (258). Dismal, symbolic 
population of British Statues : The kind of Aristocracy Popular Suffrage 



SUMMARY 347 

would choose for us. Hudson a King, ' elected by the people,' as none 
other is or was : His value as a demigod ; as a maker of railways. 
Answer to Jefferson Brick, the American Editor, touching overgrown 
worthless Dukes, and undergrown incredible Bishops : Our ugliest 
anomalies, done by universal suffrage, not by patent : Bobus of Hounds- 
ditch. This universal ousting of imaginary Governors, to issue in the 
attainment of Governors who have a right and a capacity to govern. 
Ballot-box and suffrage ' machine.' Alas, could we once get Laws which 
were just : The Bravest of existing Men on the throne ; and on the 
gibbet the veritable Supreme Scoundrel of the Commonwealth. Universal 
suffrage, equivalent to abject helplessness and flat despair. Peace? 
Better war to the knife, war till we all die, than such a 'peace' ! (263). 
Hero-worship : This Universe wholly, this temporary Flame-image of 
the Eternal, one beautiful and terrible Energy of Heroisms ; presided 
over by a Divine Nobleness, or Infinite Hero. Hypocritical Idolatries : 
Sets of gods or fetishes, to which prayers are mumbled ; while the real 
worship, or heart's love and admiration, is elsewhere. Whom do you in 
your very soul admire, and strive to imitate and emulate ; is it God's 
servant, or the Devil's ? There is no other ' religion ' in the man, of 
the slightest moment compared with this : Immense asthmatic spiritual 
Hurdygurdy. It was not 'always so,' and even till lately was never 
so (276). Collins's dull old Peerage-Book, properly all we English have 
for a National Bible : Of these ancient peerages, a very great majority 
visibly had authentic ( heroes ' for their founders. One's heart is sore to 
think how far, how very far all this has vanished from us. Our one 
steady regulated supply, the class definable as Supreme Stump-Orators 
in the Lawyer department. England once a Hierarchy : To the English 
modern populations, Supreme Hero and Supreme Scoundrel, perhaps 
as nearly as is possible to human creatures, indistinguishable (281). 
High columns, raised by prurient stupidity and public delusion to 
gamblers and blockheads. The so-called Christian Clerus : Brave men 
many of them, after their sort ; and in a position which we may admit 
to be wonderful and dreadful. But as to Statues, and the mischief they 
are doing, the Woods-and-Forests really ought to interfere (286). 

No. VIII. JESUITISM 

For some two centuries past, the genius of mankind dominated by the 
gospel of Ignatius. What the English reader may think of it, and of 
his share in it. The Spiritual, the parent and first-cause of the Practical. 
Thrice-baleful Universe of Cant, prophesied for these Latter Days : The 
Universe makes no immediate objection to be conceived in any way. The 
saddest condition of human affairs, where men ' decree injustice by a 



348 LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 

law' (p. 293). A poor man, in our days, has many gods foisted on him : 
If Ignatius, worshipped by millions as a kind of god, is in eternal fact 
a kind of devil, surely it is pressingly expedient that men laid it awfully 
to heart. Ignatius Loyola, a man born greedy ; full of prurient elements 
from the first. On the walls of Pampeluna : A wrecked Papin's-digester. 
Reflections, true, salutary, and even somewhat of sacred : Agonies of 
newbirth. The true remedy for wrecked sensualism, to annihilate 
one's pruriency. Let Eternal Justice triumph on me, since it cannot 
triumph by me : The voice of Nature to a repentant outcast sinner 
turning again towards the realms of manhood ; and the precept of all 
right Christianity too. Not so did Ignatius read the omens : The Task 
he fixed upon as his. Wilt thou then, at the bidding of any Pope, war 
against Almighty God ? Frantic mortal, thy late Pighood itself is trivial 
in comparison ! (299). Precious message of salvation : Salutary nature 
of falsehoods, and divine authority of things doubtful. Not ' victory ' for 
Ignatius and his black militia. Luther and Protestantism Proper : Jean 
Jacques and Protestantism Improper. ' Vivaciousness ' of Jesuitism. 
Obedience good and indispensable : Loyalty to Beelzebub ; most con- 
spicuous proof of caitiffhood within a man's possibility. This country 
tolerably cleared of Jesuits : Expulsion of the Jesuit Body of little 
avail, with the Jesuit Soul so nestled in the life of mankind everywhere. 
' Cant, and even sincere Cant ' : O Heaven, when a man doing his 
sincerest is still but canting ! The coward solacemeut of composure and 
a whole skin. Deadly virus of lying ; and such an odour as the angels 
never smelt before. Awakening from the sleep of death into the 
Sorcerer's Sabbath of Anarchy (305). A man's ' religion,' not the many 
things he tries to believe, but the few things he cannot doubt. The 
modern man's e religion ' ; what poor scantling of ' divine convictions ' 
he has. A singular piece of scribble, in Sauerteig's hand, on Pig 
Philosophy : Pigs of sensibility and superior logical parts : Their ' re- 
ligion,' notion of the Universe, and of their interests and duties 
there (313). The Fine Arts, by some thought to be a kind of religion : 
Here too the consummate flower of Consecrated Unveracity reigns 
supreme. The new St. Stephen's, with its wilderness of stone pepper- 
boxes. The Fine Arts, like the coarse and every art of Man's god-given 
Faculty, sent hither not to fib and dance, but to speak and work. 
Homer's Iliad, no Fiction but a Ballad History : The Hebrew Bible, 
before all things, true, as no other Book ever was or will be. The 
History of every Nation an Epic and Bible, the clouded struggling 
image of a God's Presence. Beyond doubt the Almighty Maker made 
this England too ; and has been and forever is miraculously present 
here. What are the eternal covenants we can believe, and dare not for 
our life's sake but go and observe? These are our Bible, our God's 



SUMMARY 849 

Word, such as it may be. 'Miracles,' 'worships,' after their kind. 
No rhythmic History of England, but what we find in Shakspeare. 
Luxurious Europe ; with its wits, story-tellers, ballad-singers, dancing- 
girls : All the Fine Arts converted into after-dinner Amusements. How 
all things hang together ! Universal Jesuitism once lodged in the heart, 
you will see it in the very finger-nails by and by (320). Our Exodus 
from Houndsditch : Yankee Gathercoal, and his strange-flashing torch- 
gleams. How simple souls clamour occasionally for what they call ( a 
new religion.' This Universe, in all times, the express image of the 
human souls, and their thoughts and activities, who dwell there. The 
' open secret,' in these dark days a very shut one indeed. Surely this 
ignoble sluggishness, sceptical torpor, is not doomed to be our final con- 
dition : Under this brutal stagnancy there does lie painfully imprisoned 
some tendency which could become heroic (329). 



INDEX 



ABLE MAN, the born soldier of Truth and 
Order, 107; appointed by 'divine right ' 
to govern, 130 ; methods of summoning 
aloft, 183. See Wisest Man. 

Administrative Reform, 92, 121. See 
Downing Street. 

American Cousins, our, no Model Com- 
monwealth, 19; their noblest battle yet 
to fight, 21, 227. 

Anarchy or open 'Kinglessness,' 6; Con- 
stituted Anarchy, 29, 214, 248; Sor- 
cerer's Sabbath of, 312. 

Approval, rightly or wrongly given, 260, 
271. 

Aristocracy, a true, or Government by 
the Best, 120 ; 'Aristocracy' of Popular 
Suffrage, 263, 280 ; veritable Hierarchy 
of Heaven, 273. See Peerage, Hier- 
archy. 

Arts, the Fine, a ' Worship of the Beau- 
tiful,' 318; intolerable hypocrisy of, 
320 ; taking into fiction, 327. 

Astonishment, different quantities of, 
122. 

Ballot-box delusion, 238. 

Bankruptcy of Imposture, 12, 140, 320. 

Benevolence, 60 ; Benevolent-Platform 
Fever, 65, 72. 

Bible, Hebrew, 174, 323 ; the Bible of a 
Nation, the authentic Biography of its 
Heroic Souls, 281, 323; our 'closed 
Bible,' 314. 

Biography, no, but wraps in it a message 
out of Heaven, 326. 

Bishops, our, and what comes of them, 
29, 161, 318 ; not our ugliest ano- 
malies, 268; our new Souls'-Overseers, 
168. 

Bobus of Hpundsditch, 270. 

British Nation, the, a new set of lessons 
to learn, 90, 158, 164, 174 ; no real con- 
cern with the Continental Anarchies, 
144. See England. 

Brotherhood with the base and foolish, 
66 

Bure.aucracy, 143. 



Burns, Robert, like Apollo taken for a 
Neatherd, 119; his chivalrous ways, 
197. 

Canada rebellion, 149, 154. 

Cant, thrice-baleful universe of, 74, 297 ; 
sincere Cant, 310. 

Capital punishment, 73, 76, 79. 

Catholic Church, the old, in its terrestrial 
relations, 131. See Pope. 

Chancellors, and their beaten road to the 
Peerage, 284. 

Charles i., 218. 

Charles n., 162, 293. 

Chartist Notabilities undergoing their 
term, 53 ; Chartist Parliament, 232. 

Chatham and his son Pitt, 146. 

Christianity, ghastly Phantasm of, 68, 
74 ; Christian hatred of Scoundrels, 70 ; 
so-called Christian Clerus, 288, 300; 
Christian Repentance, 302; Gather- 
coal's account of the Christian Church, 
330. 

Churches, our best-behaved of, 259. See 
Law. 

Collins's Peerage-Book, 281. 

Colonial Office, sad experiences in the, 
87 ; Constitutions for the Colonies on 
the anvil, 149, 152 ; our Colonies worth 
something to the Country, 150 ; new 
kind of Governors needed, 155. 

Command and obedience, 166. See 
Obedience. 

Constitutions, the true model of, 22. 

Cowardice, 275, 308, 311. 

Crabbe, on British Liberty, 29 ; our fatal 
Oblivion of Right and Wrong, 80 ; Ad- 
ministrative Reform, 92 ; Constituted 
Anarchy, 139 ; Ducal Costermongers, 
179; Ballot-box, 238; Machine for 
doing Government, 272; so-called 
Christian Clerus, 288. 

Criminals, what to do with our, 72, 272. 

Cromwell, Christianity of, 70, 74, 162 ; 
his Protestant war, 145 ; his notion of 
'voting,' 243, 246 ; Cromwell's Statue, 
254. 

851 



352 



LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 



1 Crucify him," a considerable feat in the 
suppression of minorities, 33, 242. See 

Dante, 64. 

Democracy, an inevitable fact of the days 
we live in, 8 ; not a ' Kind of Govern- 
ment,' 14; no Nation that could ever 
subsist upon, 18 ; the essence of what- 
ever truth is in it, that the able man 
be promoted in whatever rank he is 
found, 119, 130. 

Devil's Elect in England, 57. 

Dinners, English public, 216. 

Dismal Science, the Professors of, 44, 
151. 

Divorce, new Sacrament of, 25. 

Dogs, dead, floating in the Westminster 
region, 200. 

Downing Street, 87-126 ; reform in, 91, 
105 ; two kinds of fundamental error, 
95 ; abler Men in, 107, 130, 142 ; one 
such indispensable, 111, 120, 233; a 
small Project of Improvement, 113. 

Downing Street, the New, 127-171 ; what 
it might grow to, hard to say, 136; 
work enough before it, 147, 165. 

Duke, no one in England so well lodged 
and tended as our prisoner-scoundrels, 
57 ; Ducal Costermongers, 170. 

Dupes, a kind of inverse cheats, 12. 

Education, Minister of, 148, 168 ; modern 
education all gone to tongue, 172 ; how 
it was in the old healthy times, 177. 

Electing and electioneering, the meaning 
of, 108, 234. 

Eloquence, unperformed, a cure for, 181. 

Enfranchisement, and what it has led 
to, 24, 42. See Free Men. 

England, and her unattainable 'Model 
Constitution,' 30; called a second 
time ' to show the Nations how to live,' 
31 ; still contains many Kings, 32, 
134 ; how the Devil provides for his 
own in England, 57 ; English veracity, 
fidelity, 63 ; what England wants, 92, 
108, 147 ; and does not want, 99, 162 ; 
a strange feeling, to be at the apex of 
English affairs, 122; England with 
the largest mass of real living interests 
ever intrusted to a Nation, 134 ; means 
to keep her Colonies a while yet, 150, 
152 ; Englishmen dare not believe the 
truth, 160; English careers to born 
genius, 185; England's hope in her 
younger sons, 213 ; no longer an earnest 
Nation, 226, 228; time of accounts 
fast arriving, 278; English Peerages 
once authentically real, 283; the 
English ramadhan, 295; poor scant- 



ling of 'divine convictions,' 315; the 
History of England, the record of the 
Divine Appearances among us, 324 ; 
our restless gnawing ennui, the pain- 
ful cry of an imprisoned heroism, not 
always to lie imprisoned, 335. See 
British Nation. 

Ennui, 335. 

Etons and Oxfords, with their broken 
crumbs of mere speech, 167, 211. 

European explosions of '1848,' 5; wars 
since Cromwell, 145 ; modern luxurious 
Europe, 328. 

Evil, no, ever wrought its own cure, 
129. 

Exeter-Hall twaddle, 68, 70. 

Eye-service, 211. 

Fetiches, reckoned respectable, 278, 

299. 
Fiction, idle, intolerable to a serious soul, 

327. 

Fiddlestring, Mr. Hesperus, 70. 
Foolish, privilege of the, to be governed 

by the Wise, 23, 34. 
Foreign Office, our, astonishing condition 

of, 89 ; reformed, 143. 
Fraternity and Equality, 24, 51, 81. 
Free Men, the Nobles of the World, 41, 

251. 

Free Press, 221. 
French People, the, a kind of Messiah 

People, very glorious indeed, 4 ; bitter 

aggravations, 4; French Convention, 

230. 
Fritz of Prussia, 146. 

Gathercoal's, Yankee, torch-gleams, 330. 

Government Offices, who made our, 102 ; 
beautiful notion of No-Government, 
139 ; Phantasm Governors, 215. 

Happy. See Unhappy. 

Hatred of scoundrels, the backbone of 
all religion, 70 ; Divine Hatred, 77. 

Heavyside, the solid Englishman, 13, 
280. 

Hercules-Harlequin in the Foreign Of- 
fice, not pleasant to think of, 89. 

Hero-worship, 276; a man's 'religion,' 
the practical Hero-worship that is in 
him, 278, 334. See Religion. 

Hierarchy of Beneficences, 259, 273 ; Re- 
ligion the parent of social Hierarchies 
275; England once a Hierarchy, 285, 
324. See Aristocracy. 

History of England in a strange con- 
dition, 281, 324. 

Home Office, William Conqueror's, 104 ; 
the Home Office our grand primary 
concern, 56, 164. 



INDEX 



353 



Homer's Iliad a Ballad History, 322. 

Horses, Farmer Hodge's, all emancipated, 
26; the horse's 'vote,' 244. 

Howard, the beatified Philanthropist, 62. 

Hudson's Statue, 254-292; what the 
Hudson worshippers ought to have 
done, while they were about it, 255 ; 
Hudson's Popular Election, 264 ; his 
value as a railway-maker, 265. See 
Statues. 

Idleness, lying in wait round all labour- 
offices, 96 ; organised idleness, 147. 

Idols, all, have to fall, 268. 

Imposture. See Bankruptcy. 

Incontinence, the half of all our sins, 
212. 

Individual responsibility, 234. 

Industry, Captains of, 35, 43 ; Industry 
or death, 46 ; Industrial Regiments, 
147, 165 ; English career of Industrial- 
ism, 185. 

Intellect, tragic consequences of insuffi- 
cient, 95, 109, 112, 124, 127, 183; 
human Intellect the exact summary 
of human Worth, 107 ; how to increase 
the supply, 113; English beaver in- 
tellect, 185. 

Irish and British Pauperism, 36 ; the 
Irish Giant, seeking whom he may 
devour, 94, 156. 

James the First's bad reign, 283. 

Jefferson Brick, answer to, 268. 

Jesuitism, 293-337 ; Age and Gospel of, 
293; stupendous achievements, 305; 
how the computation quite broke down, 
306 ; ' vivaciousness of Jesuitism, 
307 ; the Jesuit Soul nestled amongst 
us, 309 ; necessity of putting it away, 
313 ; Jesuitism in the Fine Arts, 319 
327 ; celebrated 'virtues,' 329. 

Jesus of Nazareth, the most indubitable 
of facts, 332. See Crucify. 

Johnson's politeness, 197. 

Justice, the one indispensable thing, 68, 
73 ; unspeakably difficult of attain- 
ment, 272; voice of Justice to a 
repentant sinner, 303 ; pig-justice, 
317. 

Kepler, 63. 

Kings everywhere, in sudden horror, 
conscious of being Playactors, 5 ; the 
true king and commander of men, 32, 
35, 54 ; not to be dispensed with 
anywhere, 111, 214 ; true function of 
a king, 138; 240, 245; no King in 
Parliament, 221, 223, 231 ; Parliament 
an 'impossible King,' 232. See Able 
Man, Wisest Man, Premier. 



Labour, true Organisation of, 36. See 
Industry, Work. 

Lamartine, M. de, at the Hotel-de-Ville, 
6. 

Law and Church, angry basilisks of, 
189 ; injustice decreed by a 'law,' 289 ; 
Lawyers, 284, 317. 

Laws and regulations of the Universe, 
how decipher the, 17, 77 ; such laws 
do verily exist, silent, but inflexibly 
sure, 204; not to be decided by our 
paltry 'votings,' 235; in the way of 
abatement, of oblivion, neither gods 
nor men prevail, 288. See Universe. 

Leming-rat, the, 241. 

Liberty, British, 30. See Enfranchise- 
ment. 

Lies, ' damned, '140 ; every lie accursed, 
and the parent of curses, 161 ; diagnosis 
of a lie, and a liar, 201 ; benevolent 
plan of reform, 209 ; subtle quint- 
essence of lying, 310. 

Light or lightning, a choice, 126, 184. 

Literature, true and sham, 168, 212 ; our 
crowded portal of, 191 ; highest pro- 
blem of, 282, 318. 

Liturgies, such as no God can hear, 280. 

Louis-Philippism, the scorn of the world, 
4. 

Love, method of, to command scoundrels, 
55. 

Loyalty to Beelzebub, 308. 

Loyola, Ignatius, 293 ; a man not good 
by nature, 300 ; on the walls of Pam- 
peluna, agonies of new-birth, 301 ; 
highest pitch of the prurient-heroic, 
war against Almighty God, 304. See 
Jesuitism. 

Majorities, blockhead, 250, 268. 
Manning, Mrs., 'dying game,' 65. 
Marten, Henry, 251. 
Medicine, profession of, 88. 
Minorities, down to minority of one 

246. 
Model Prisons, 48-86 ; a London prison 

of the model kind, 52. 
Moloch, our modern, 212. 
Money, doomed to possess, 206. 

Nawaub, Europe one big ugly, 328. 

Needlewomen, Distressed, 27. 

Negro population, our, need to be 

' emancipated ' from their indolence, 

67. See Slavery. 
Nessus'-shirt, our poisoned, 162. 
New Era, our heavy-laden long-eared, 

10, 46, 47. 
Nineteenth Century, intellect of the, 

127. 
Nobility, Ig-, 208, 334. 



354 



LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS 



Noble, young, true education of the, 

178. See Aristocracy. 
Nomadism uglier than slavery, 42. 

Obedience, 166 ; true and false, 308, 330. 

Old age, reverence for, 7. 

Opera, 328. 

"Ou' clo'," the fateful Hebrew Prophecy, 

33, 76, 80, 330. 
Oxford. See Eton. 

Paradise to all-and-sundry, 66, 80. 

Parliament, modern recipe of, 14 ; the 
English Parliament once a Council of 
actual Rulers, 31, 216, 228 ; now an 
enormous National Palaver, 100, 194, 
220; what it has done for us, 123; 
kind of men sent there, 141, 226; 
Parliamentary career, 189 ; Parlia- 
mentary bagpipes, 199, 208; Parlia- 
ments, 214-253 ; origin of our English 
Parliaments, 216; the Long Parlia- 
ment, 218, 228 ; position of Parliament 
become false and impossible, 219 ; 
with a Free Press, the real function of 
Parliament goes on everywhere, con- 
tinually, 221; Adviser of the Sove- 
reign, or Sovereign itself, 224, 232; 
Newspaper Reporters, in a Parliament 
and Nation no longer in earnest, 225 ; 
the French Convention all in deadly 
earnest, 230; Chartist Parliament, 232; 
a Parliament indispensable, 239 ; Con- 
densed Folly of Nations, 239. 

Paupers, our Irish and British, 36 ; ad- 
dress to, 38; Pauperism, our Social 
Sin grown manifest, 158, 164. 

Peace, keeping the, the function of a 
policeman, 136; something more 
sacred than 'peace,' 275. 

Pedant, the, 97. 

Peel, Sir Robert, the one likely or pos- 
sible Reformer of Downing Street, 91 ; 
his 'eleventh hour," 169. 

Peerage, the English, past and present, 
282. See Aristocracy. 

Philanthropy, indiscriminate, 51 ; threat- 
ening to drown human society as in 
deluges, 65. 

Pig-Philosophy, 315. 

Poet, what the, should be, 318, 323. 

Politeness, who invented, 197. 

Political Economy, and its small ' law of 
God,' 45. See Dismal Science. 

Pope, a Reforming, and his huge un- 
reformable Popedom, 2. 

Premier, mad methods of choosing a, 
99, 187 ; a more unbeautiful class 
never raked out of the ooze, 134 ; one 
wise Premier the beginning of all good, 
142. See King. 



Present Time, the, 1-47. 
Protestantism, proper and improper, 

306. 
Puseyisms, 161, 191. 

Railways, how, are shifting all towns of 
Britain into new places, 266 ; stupend- 
ous railway miracles, 277. 

Ramadhan, the English, 2f)5. 

Real, the, always respectable, 290. 

Reform, poor old Genius of, 69. See 
Administrative Reform, Downing 
Street. 

Religion, not the many things a man 
tries to believe, but the few he cannot 
doubt, 313; foolish clamour for a 
'new religion,' 333. See Worship. 

Repentance, sacredness of, 301. 

Republics, ancient and modern, 18. 

Revenge, mournful twaddle about, 73 ; 
sacred duty of, 78. 

Reverence, our want of, 258. 

Reward and punishment, 75, 80. 

Right and Wrong, silent awful sense of, 
50, 334 ; dim oblivion of, 81. 

Roman Augurs, Cicero's, 161. 

Sauerteig on Pig-Philosophy, 315. 

Schoolmasters, when useful, 178. 

Scoundrel is scoundrel, 55, 60 ; not to be 
commanded by mere ' love,' 55 ; 
Supreme Scoundrel, 83 ; Hero and 
Scoundrel, now almost indistinguish- 
able, 286. 

Sea-kings, the old, and Saxon Pirates, 
104. 

Self-annihilation, 303. 

Seventy-four, an English, and its inar- 
ticulate traditions, 104. 

Shakspeare's scattered tones of a National 
Epos, 326. 

Shams, utter damnability of, 13, 22. 

Silesian Insurrection, 3. 

Silence, excellent, or good work with lips 
closed, 175 ; what silence means in the 
Nineteenth Century, 192 ; a life in 
silence, 209 ; silent work, and silent 
suffering, 212. 

Sincerity, deep awful divine quality of, 
310. 

Slaves, authentic, to be treated as such, 
42, 248. See Mastership, Negro. 

Sleswick thunder-horse, badly ridden, 
101, 152. 

Sluggard-and-Scoundrel Protection So- 
ciety, 66. 

Society, vital Iwigs of, 133, 183 ; no So- 
ciety, but a lost horde, 283. 

Somnauth, Idol of, 268. 

Souls'-Overseers. See Bishops. 

rfparrowbill and M'Pastehorn, 67. 



INDEX 



355 



Spartan humanity, 41. 

Speak, ability to, no evidence of ability 
to work, 115, 173, 195; speech and 
sham-speech, 174, 179, 193; eloquent 
unperformed speech, horrible, 181 ; 
Human Speech no longer true, 312. 
See Stump-Orator. 

Spiritual, the, the parent and first-cause 
of the practical, 296. 

Statues, our Public, symbolic of our 
spiritual condition, 255, 258, 263, 286, 
290 ; how they are got up, 260 ; 
sculptural talent manifest in them, 
262 ; how they ought to be put down, 
289. 

St. Stephen's, the new, 321. 

Stump-Orator, 172-213 ; a mouthpiece of 
Chaos, 176, 199, 206 ; Supreme Stump- 
Orators in the Lawyer department, 
284. 

Stupidity, our one enemy, 98, 105, 113. 

Suffrage, Universal, 34, 242 ; recipe of 
Popular Election, 264 ; answer to Jef- 
ferson Brick, 268 ; universal-suffrage 
equivalent to flat despair, 274. 

Supply-and-demand, brought to bear on 
the Black ' labour-market, ' 27. 

Times Newspaper, 221. 

Tongue, human talent all gone to, 172, 

187, 192 ; how to cure the evil, 181, 

209. 

Unhappy sugary brethren, 66; happiness 
not come, 336. 

Universe, the, a Monarchy and Hier- 
archy, 21 ; the vesture of an Invisible 



Infinite, 277, 296 ; M'Croudy's notion 
of, 288 ; all things to all men, 333 ; 
' open secret ' of, 334. See Laws. 

Virtue, human, raw materials of, 65. 

Voting, foolish unanimity of, 15 ; large 
liberty of ' voting ' in God's Universe, 
but under conditions inexorable, 22, 
203, 234, 237, 274; what to do with the 
'fool's vote,' 238, 243, 315; the 'votes' 
of all men worth knowing, 240 ; the 
horse's ' vote,' 244 ; the slave's, 250 ; 
the man worth taking the vote of, 
252. 

"William Conqueror's Home Office, 104. 
William, Dutch, 145. 
William Ruf us and his Parliaments, 216. 
Wisdom alone can recognise wisdom, 112, 

118, 141 ; intrinsically of silent nature, 

196. 
Wisest man, the, at the top of society, 

259 ; he and not a counterfeit, under 

penalties, 22, 198. 
Work for all men, 43, 45 ; a Human Doer 

the most complex and inarticulate of 

Nature's Facts, 195 ; desirability of 

work, 260. See Labour. 
Working man, true education of the, 

177. 
Worship, practical, 256 ; many phases of 

worship, 276, 299, 324. 
Worth, human, practical reverence for, 

75 ; the essence of all true 'religions,' 

106, 113. See Intellect. 

Zero, the Right Honourable, 100. 



THE END 



Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to Her Majesty 
at the Edinburgh University Press. 



